pokke pa dano oa pi larro gum 	separation of the people (into tribes) came because of the struggle for land
jub pull ikella amwoddi 	bring me some groundnuts in your hands for me to eat 
Ci Petero owaco bote ni, “Ainea, Yecu Kricito ocaŋo twoni woko	“Aeneas,” Peter said to him, “Jesus Christ heals you
Ka nino ma mito romo aboro okato i ŋe lok magi, Yecu otero Petero ki Jon ki Yakobo, oito kwedgi i wi got ka lega. 	About eight days after Jesus said this, he took Peter, John and James with him and went up onto a mountain to pray.
lakwat maber en aye Yecu 	Jesus is the good shepherd 
En dok oloko ni, “In Rwot wiati iketo guti me lobo, polo bene en tic me ciŋi. 	He also says, “In the beginning, Lord, you laid the foundations of the earth, and the heavens are the work of your hands.
pud latin, tic ma kit eno pud ngayo woko	he is still a child, such work is still above him 
nino tye ka makko wangge 	he is feeling sleepy 
Ento i kom lok man me cer ki i kin jo muto-ni, yam pe wukwano lok ma Lubaŋa oloko botwu ni, 	At the resurrection people will neither marry nor be given in marriage; they will be like the angels in heaven.
dano myero gutyelle i tic ka gimitto donggo anyim 	people must support one another, in work, if they want to succeed
Gupenye ni, “Lapwony, Moses yam ocoyo botwa ni, ka laco mo oto woko oweko dakone ma pe ki litino, ominne myero olak dako-nu, wek onywal kwede litino ka wi ominne. 	“Teacher,” they said, “Moses wrote for us that if a man’s brother dies and leaves a wife but no children, the man must marry the widow and raise up offspring for his brother.
wek oŋene botwu ducu ki bot lwak jo Icrael ducu ni, pi nyiŋ Yecu Lanajaret, ma wun wuguro i kom yatariya, ma Lubaŋa ocero woko ki i kin jo muto-ni aye laco man ocuŋ i nyimwu ma kome yot. 	then know this, you and all the people of Israel: It is by the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom you crucified but whom God raised from the dead, that this man stands before you healed.
En ooro lupwonnyene aryo ki i kingi kun cikogi ni, “Wucit wa i Jerucalem	So he sent two of his disciples, telling them, “Go into the city, and a man carrying a jar of water will meet you
Gucoko luker kacel i kabedo ma gilwoŋo i leb Ibru ni Armagedon. 	Then they gathered the kings together to the place that in Hebrew is called Armageddon.
Lubaŋa Wonwa ki Rwotwa Yecu Kricito omiwu kica ki kuc. 	Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus by the will of God, and Timothy our brother, To the church of God in Corinth, together with all his holy people throughout Achaia:
waecitto ka nyomme pa Okelogi 	we are going for the Okellos' marriage or wedding
twoo aona opiyo maarro makko oguro gee mada 	tuberculocis tends to affect the spine very much
kwidi cwaa en aye ngat acel ikom gin ma kello ayilla i dong ngwiny litino ma miyo gin gigwinynyo gwinygi pi kare ducu 	thread worms are one of the things that cause irritations around the anus of children and make them scratch their bottoms most of the time, as they scratch their bottoms, they pick the eggs of the worm under their nails and get reinfection again and so on until treated
peyo lawangge otoo ki odoo 	leading the blind man with a stick
cwinye pe bedo yom i kom tim ma pe atir, ento cwinye bedo yom i lok ada. 	Love does not delight in evil but rejoices with the truth.
maarro ticce mada 	loves his work very much 
yat tye ka tuurro  	the trees are flowering or blossoming
geng Iwango pe opot i caini 	prevent the fly from falling into your tea 
En bidwoko Luicrael mapol bot Rwot Lubaŋagi, 	He will bring back many of the people of Israel to the Lord their God.
Pien ŋat ma camo nyo mato kun pe oniaŋ maber i kom gin ma gilwoŋo ni kom Rwot, noŋo en tye ka kelo kop i kome kene ka ce ocamo nyo omato. 	For those who eat and drink without discerning the body of Christ eat and drink judgment on themselves.
nekko mac 	to extinguishing the fire 
lum ot acel ka opotto pe miyo ot cweer	one piece of grass from the roof of the house, if it falls down, it will not make the roof of the house leak
I kare ma doŋ gutyeko wero wer, gua gucito i wi got Jeituni. 	When they had sung a hymn, they went out to the Mount of Olives.
pii malyet en aye ber me lwok	hot water is good for bathing
gitye ka myello myel bwola 	they are dancing bwola dance
janynyo wang 	opening the eyes widely 
gitye ka peyo lapoya giteerro i ot yat apoya 	they are dragging or drawing with force a mad man and taking him to the mental hospital
Ka doŋ gugamo, gucako ŋur bot won ot, 	When they received it, they began to grumble against the landowner.
An abedo cadengi kun aŋeyo ni gumoko matek i kom Lubaŋa, ento kadi bed gumoko, ci pe gucuŋo i ŋec kikome. 	Brothers and sisters, my heart’s desire and prayer to God for the Israelites is that they may be saved.
pien doŋ amiyogi lok ma ceŋ imiya, gin doŋ gujolo, giŋeyo atikatika ni an aa ki boti	And now, Father, glorify me in your presence with the glory I had with you before the world began.
ento i kare ma en oo i Roma oyenya matek nio ka ono?a. 	May the Lord show mercy to the household of Onesiphorus, because he often refreshed me and was not ashamed of my chains.
maarro cammo mada pot dek ma numu 	he loves eating raw vegetables
amitti i pim lac pa dye ot man pien amitto ketto lye kapet 	I want you to measure the size of this room because 
cukari otum woko li weng	the sugar is completely finished 
Ka dok otito botgi lok mukene mapol, ma tuco matek dok cuko cwinygi kun waco ni, “Wularre kenwu wua woko ki bot yalwak man muŋak-ki.” 	With many other words he warned them; and he pleaded with them, “Save yourselves from this corrupt generation.”
Ento lwak jo mapol i kin jo ma guwinyo lokgi guye, wel dano omedde oo alip abic. 	But many who heard the message believed; so the number of men who believed grew to about five thousand.
gocco ma kit enno ber ki lunek 	such type of beating is good for the killers
olekko lek marac mada  	he dreamed a very bad dream
Tem ki tweroni ducu me bino bota oyotoyot. 	I have fought the good fight, I have finished the race, I have kept the faith.
Doŋ acwalo en me dwogo boti enno, en doŋ odoko macalo dul koma kikome. 	Formerly he was useless to you, but now he has become useful both to you and to me.
ki ŋat ma mito bedo mukwoŋo i kinwu, en aye myero obed opiiwu ducu. 	and whoever wants to be first must be your slave—
ka gimitto cello gin mo, gidiyo oton ka dong mwoc ci cello 	when something is to be shot, the cock is pressed and the gun bursts and a thing is shot
Ci min kulu oŋoko pii ki i doge i kor dako-nu, piine obedo calo pii me kulu, wek pii opoŋ omol dako-nu woko. 	Then from his mouth the serpent spewed water like a river, to overtake the woman and sweep her away with the torrent.
anyoo twoo marac mada, myerro gigeg pe omak litino 	measles is a very bad disease, which should be prevented from infecting the children
bongone opong ki nyugi keken 	his cloth is full of lice 
Wek miti me awobi obedi, ento ket tammi i bedo ki kit ma atir, niye, mar ki kuc, kacel ki jo ducu ma kok bot Rwot kun igi leŋ. 	Those who cleanse themselves from the latter will be instruments for special purposes, made holy, useful to the Master and prepared to do any good work.
Yecu en aye lalar mewa 	Jesus is our saviour 
Lupwonnye gucito gutimo kit macalo Yecu ocikogi kwede-ni, 	“Say to Daughter Zion, ‘See, your king comes to you, gentle and riding on a donkey, and on a colt, the foal of a donkey.’”
wiye pek  	his head is heavy 
wolle rac mada	to poison is very bad 
Ci gukelo latin kana bot Yecu, gucako peto boŋŋigi i kome, ocako bedo i wiye. 	When they brought the colt to Jesus and threw their cloaks over it, he sat on it.
bile miyo tek cwiny ki wakke bot joo ma kutto 	the whistle gives courage and pride to the people who blow them 
ka dok anoŋo kare ci abilwoŋi.” 	When I find it convenient, I will send for you.”
mwoc pa kot poyo kom dano 	thundering of the rain startles the people
rwako yat itera	he drives a long peg into the anus
pet laa ki dano i dye ot wek gubed iye 	spread the hide on the floor for the people to sit on 
en gwok tiyo tic man 	he is incapable of doing this work 
nyig ma Acoli ma i dyerre gilwonggo kwede en aye lakalatwee 	the name for the star used by the central Acholi is lakalatwee 
jalle rac rucce ki dako pa lwaotte 	he is a bad man he has an affair with his companion's wife
Lwak mapol guwoto kacel ki Yecu, ci Yecu olokke botgi owaco botgi ni, 	Large crowds were traveling with Jesus, and turning to them he said:
latinne pe tye ka pugi maber pien cak pa minne pe 	the child is not gaining weight well because the mother has no milk 
peyo lawangge otoo ki odoo 	leading the blind man with a stick
“Ka wumara, ci wubigwoko cikka. 	You may ask me for anything in my name, and I will do it.
obwoya woko i tuko me dongge 	he defeated me in boxing 
Ka gucito bot ajwagi madito ki ludoŋo guwacci, “Wan watyeko kwoŋŋe matek ma watweyo ni pe wabibilo cam mo nio ka waneko Paulo. 	They went to the chief priests and the elders and said, “We have taken a solemn oath not to eat anything until we have killed Paul.
Gucako riŋo gurumo kabedo ducu ma tye kunnu, kun gikelo lutwo ma gutiŋogi ki kitara, giterogi i kabedo ducu ma guwinyo ni en tye kunnu. 	They ran throughout that whole region and carried the sick on mats to wherever they heard he was.
Pien jo ma gilwoŋo pol, ento ma giyero nok.” 	He asked, ‘How did you get in here without wedding clothes, friend?’ The man was speechless.
Aŋeyo dok aniaŋ maber i Rwot Yecu ni, pe tye gin mo ma obedo me kwer pire kene	Instead, make up your mind not to put any stumbling block or obstacle in the way of a brother or sister.
gerro ot rucu rucu 	building the house hurriedly  
Kadi wa i kare-ni ka gikwano botgi cik pa Moses, laum pud bedo kakare, umo tamgi woko. 	It has not been removed, because only in Christ is it taken away.
yenynyo tyen lok ma okello jemmo 	inquiring into the cause of the strike
wer wek wawiny 	sing so that we may hear
Wan doŋ wawinyo lok me kwena maber bene calo gin, ento lok me kwena ma gin guwinyo pe okonyogi, pien pe orwatte ki niyegi. 	For we also have had the good news proclaimed to us, just as they did; but the message they heard was of no value to them, because they did not share the faith of those who obeyed.
Pi meno, myero wucuŋ ma wutweyo pyerwu woko ki ada, wuruk bene kit ma atir wek obed nyonyo me geŋo korwu, 	Therefore put on the full armor of God, so that when the day of evil comes, you may be able to stand your ground, and after you have done everything, to stand.
En otiro bot Cimon lanyoŋ pyen, ma ode cok ki dog nam.” 	He is staying with Simon the tanner, whose house is by the sea.”
emme juk juk 	her thigh is very big 
Ka Yecu oneno minne, ki lapwonnye meno ma en maro kun gucuŋ i ŋete, owaco bot minne ni, “Maa, nen wodi!” 	This garment was seamless, woven in one piece from top to bottom.
Ci Yecu ocako tiŋo wot orumo lobo Galilaya ducu, kun woto ki tito lok i kacokkegi ki ryemo cen-gu bene. 	So he traveled throughout Galilee, preaching in their synagogues and driving out demons.
Ka dako mo pe boyo wiye, myero onyar yer wiye woko. Ka bedo me lewic ka dako olyelo wiye, nyo onyaro yer wiye anyara, en doŋ myero obo wiye woko. 	For if a woman does not cover her head, she might as well have her hair cut off; but if it is a disgrace for a woman to have her hair cut off or her head shaved, then she should cover her head.
Ka en doŋ ocamo dek ma gigwene, ci okato woko cut	But no one at the meal understood why Jesus said this to him.
Lwak dano mapol ata ma gua ki i Galilaya, Dekapoli, Jerucalem, Judaya ki loka Jordan ducu gulube.	Large crowds from Galilee, the Decapolis, Jerusalem, Judea and the region across the Jordan followed him.
pe amitto tic me boyi 	I do not want to work as a house boy 
pur poto ne ci jaa wii lumme ajaaya 	cultivate this field but only superficially cut the grass 
jalle maarro lok arony mada 	the man always likes abusive or impertinent words 
Ento Yecu okwero woko, owacce ni, “Dok paco bot lutuwu, icitit gin madit ma Rwot otimo i komi, ki kit ma otimi kwede kica.” 	Jesus did not let him, but said, “Go home to your own people and tell them how much the Lord has done for you, and how he has had mercy on you.”
leyo bongo owekko ononggo twoo mida i komme 	sharing dress made him to get skin disease, ring worm 
Ka tye i dog cam kacel kwedgi, omako mugati, opwoyo, obaro iye, omiyo botgi. 	But they urged him strongly, “Stay with us, for it is nearly evening; the day is almost over.” So he went in to stay with them.
jarara tye kitte ma pat pat, mukene macallo me jabu, lak lyec, dayaman, me got ki mukene 	there are many types of buttons, some of things like gold, ivory, diamond, precious stones such as ruby, emerald, sapphire and many other
Pien Lubaŋa ma yam owaco ni, “Leŋo myero oryeny kun a i colpiny,” en aye ma doŋ oryeny i cwinywa, omiyowa leŋo me ŋeyo deyo pa Lubaŋa ma oryeny i waŋ Kricito. 	For what we preach is not ourselves, but Jesus Christ as Lord, and ourselves as your servants for Jesus’ sake.
lameego icitto Lucile?  	sister where are you going?
lane labwoc mada 	the fellow is an insolent person or an offensive person 
Wora ma omiyogi bota dit makato ducu, pe tye ŋatti mo ma twero mayogi ki i ciŋ Won. 	My sheep listen to my voice; I know them, and they follow me.
pien bedo ber ka dul komi mo acel orwenyo, kato ma kono gibolo komi woko kulu i Geena. 	It is better for you to lose one part of your body than for your whole body to go into hell.
i ceng caa alworro citto ka kwang i kulu caa pi nyang ma giwacci tye rye 	that day I feared going to swim in that river because of the crocodiles, which they said, were there 
ladit ma miini juc meno nonggo maarri pien ka pe maarri wekki mape miini juc nio ka i potto i bal 	a person who gives you warning loves you, because if he does not like you, he leaves you alone until you fall into trouble
Jon olwoŋo jo aryo ki i kin lupwonnyene oorogi bot Rwot ka penye ni, “In aye ŋat ma myero obin-ni, nyo dok wakur ŋat mukene?” 	he sent them to the Lord to ask, “Are you the one who is to come, or should we expect someone else?”
Ka doŋ ocikogi, ci ocito i wi got ka lega. 	After leaving them, he went up on a mountainside to pray.
pe konynyo me jug i ot 	it is of no use withdrawing into the house
olwit rac mada me ceyo litino gweni 	the eagle is very dangerous in snatching the chicks 
Yecu dok oloko kwedgi i carolok kun wacci, 	“This is how my heavenly Father will treat each of you unless you forgive your brother or sister from your heart.”
Gin ma aloko-ni pe obedo cik ma an aye amiyo, ento anyuto botwu kit ma jo mukene giketo cwinygi, wek anen mar ma wutye kwede ka obedo mar me ada. 	But since you excel in everything—in faith, in speech, in knowledge, in complete earnestness and in the love we have kindled in you—see that you also excel in this grace of giving.
yecci twerro tinge 	this load can be carried 
peny Okot maber nen callo en tye ka mow lok 	ask Okot very carefully, it appears as though he is hiding something
Ka doŋ okato woko, Yecu owaco ni, “Koni doŋ giketo deyo i kom Wod pa dano, dok giketo deyo i kom Lubaŋa pire. 	And it was night.
Yecu openyogi ni, “Pe wuniaŋ te carolok man? Wubiniaŋ niŋniŋ carolok ducu? 	Then Jesus said to them, “Don’t you understand this parable? How then will you understand any parable?
ocitto ka potto banya bot lureme 	he went to ask for a loan from his friends
pien ŋat ma doŋ odonyo i yweyo bot Lubaŋa noŋo doŋ oywe woko ki i ticce, calo Lubaŋa ma yam oywe woko ki i ticce-ni. 	for anyone who enters God’s rest also rests from their works, just as God did from his.
mwod layata ma numo 	eat an uncooked sweet potatoes 
Dok wun jo Pilipi wuŋeyo maber ni, i kare ma yam aa i Makedonia i acakki tito lok me kwena maber pe tye lwak mo i kin jo muye Rwot ma guribbe kweda i yo man me miyo ki gamo mot, ento kono wun keken. 	Yet it was good of you to share in my troubles.
wanynyo wang bur 	removing off the dressing on the sore or ulcer 
Ento Jerucalem ma tye i polo lone kene, en aye obedo minwa. 	One covenant is from Mount Sinai and bears children who are to be slaves: This is Hagar.
ladit dong otii mada, wotto dong ni gotongoto, pe wotto maber wacel 	the old man is really old, he does not walk well at all, he just staggers
gwok lok  	not tactful tactless
werro ot ki rangi 	decorating the house with colour
dog gwok jot ki remo ka ocammo ringo mape giteddo 	the mouth of the dog is smeared or gets wet with blood when it has eaten uncooked meat 
oywec got becco mada ma katto oywec mukene 	the brooms obtained from the mountainous area are much better than any other brooms 
Ka doŋ atubatuba ogik, Paulo olwoŋo lupwonnye bote, ka otyeko cuko cwinygi, ci ocikogi, ocito woko i Makedonia. 	When the uproar had ended, Paul sent for the disciples and, after encouraging them, said goodbye and set out for Macedonia.
gweni tye ka cammo kal ma gimoyo i dye kal ka twoo 	the chicken are eating the millet spread on the compound to dry
Nikodemo ma yam obino bote, ma en bene ŋat acel i kingi, openyogi ni, 	No! But this mob that knows nothing of the law—there is a curse on them.”
wek ginen niyewu, ka ce tye niye me ada. Pien kadi jabu ma gitemo ki mac pe ri nakanaka, ento niyewa pire dit kato jabu, dok bene bikelo botwu pak ki deyo ki woro i kare ma Yecu Kricito binen iye. 	In all this you greatly rejoice, though now for a little while you may have had to suffer grief in all kinds of trials.
Wumak larre aye obed tok nyonyo me wiwu, ki lok pa Lubaŋa ma en aye pala lucwan pa Cwiny Maleŋ. 	In addition to all this, take up the shield of faith, with which you can extinguish all the flaming arrows of the evil one.
lacoone obeddo ni gog 	the man is wasted and thin
waarre twerro porre ka rommo tyenni 	the shoes can be tried if they fit your feet 
En oriŋo, ocito bot Cimon Petero, ki bot lapwonnye meno mukene ma Yecu maro, otittigi ni, “Gikwanyo Rwot woko ki i lyel, pe waŋeyo ka ma gikete iye.” 	Early on the first day of the week, while it was still dark, Mary Magdalene went to the tomb and saw that the stone had been removed from the entrance.
odonggo lawotte matek mada i tukko me dongge 	in the game of boxing, he boxed his friend very much
Dok wuwac bot Arkipo ni, “Myero inen ni icobo tic ma doŋ igamo i Rwot.” 	After this letter has been read to you, see that it is also read in the church of the Laodiceans and that you in turn read the letter from Laodicea.
en lagwee odilo maber mada 	he is a very good football player
dok bene ka tamwu opokke woko i lok mo, Lubaŋa binyuto man bene botwu. 	All of us, then, who are mature should take such a view of things
ocwallo call kicwaarre 	she sent a shirt to her husband
pok mungati man rye aryo 	divide this bread into two
obeddo piny ni rwenynyeke 	he sat carelessly or in a disorderly manner
Minne pe Maliam? Ki omegine pe Yakobo ki Yucepu ki Cimon ka Juda? 	“Isn’t this the carpenter’s son? Isn’t his mother’s name Mary, and aren’t his brothers James, Joseph, Simon and Judas?
lanynyo ki ngwec 	to beat  beating in a running contest to outstrip outstripping or to surpass surpassing in running
Yam onoŋo abedo kwo laboŋo cik mogo, ento i kare ma cik ca obino, bal ocako bedo kwo, an ato woko. 	But now, by dying to what once bound us, we have been released from the law so that we serve in the new way of the Spirit, and not in the old way of the written code.
cwinynye tye ka cweer mada pi lok ma rac ma gilokko i komme 	he is very much annoyed, and bitter about what was said about him
Ma peya nino madit me Kato (Paska) oo, Yecu onoŋo ŋeyo ni cawane doŋ oromo me weko lobo man me dok bot Won	And in that place many believed in Jesus.
moo dyang opotto woko omakke matek mitto ameya 	the butter is frozen hard, it needs to be melted
Ka Yecu odonyo i ot, ka ma gubedo iye kengi, ci lupwonnyene gupenye ni, “Gin aŋo mugeŋowa ryemone?” 	After Jesus had gone indoors, his disciples asked him privately, “Why couldn’t we drive it out?”
latin ka gipwonyno maber ci pe layo dyewor	when a child is well trained, he does not pass urine at night 
amitti i pim lac pa dye ot man pien amitto ketto lye kapet 	measure this child and make clothes for hers
kel yat ma apadda me paddo lobo 	bring the flat wood for moulding the clay
pii ma lyet gonynyo kom dano ka i Iwokke kwede 	hot water relaxes the body when you bathe with it
danone maarro punno dano mada	the man loves very much conning people
Ento ŋat acel acel i kakare: mukwoŋo Kricito, me wi mwaka, ka lacenne jo pa Kricito i kare me dwogone. 	But each in turn: Christ, the firstfruits; then, when he comes, those who belong to him.
Yecu olokke bot lupwonnyene, owaco botgi i muŋ ni, “Tye ki gum, dano ma neno gin ma wun wuneno! 	Then he turned to his disciples and said privately, “Blessed are the eyes that see what you see.
gwkido lok put put 	incessantly talking 
mon Indi gin aye gimaarro ogul lulu i gut cinggi ki i gut tyengi 	the Indian women love very much to wear bracelets of bright copper and brass on their wrists and ankles as ornaments
ruk oturre aturra tin ki wor	the menses came suddenly today at night
meer twatwal bollo dano it tot 	getting too drunk throws a man into sadness
kel gunia abic kany 	bring five gunny bags here 
Wumot Maliam ma yam otiyo tic matek i kinwu-ni. 	Greet my dear friend Epenetus, who was the first convert to Christ in the province of Asia.
tod pii ki i wang it kadi dong tye ka cwiny woko 	draw the water in small quantity from the well even though it is drying up
byello latin i ngee ber pien latin dong pe parro ni etye nyo edong kene, min latin bene pe parro ni latin odong kene gwok nyo gin mo otim 	carrying the child on the back is good because the child does not feel lonely but part of the mother, likewise the mother also does not feel that the child is alone and perhaps something might hurt her
lagigi it 	a person who is always grudging
peny madit en aye bibedo me donynyo i yunibacity 	the important examination will be the one for entering the University
kun wacca ni, “Co gin ma itye ka nenone i buk-ki, ka doŋ icwal bot lwak jo muye Kricito ma gitye i kabedo abiro mapatpat, i Epeco, i Cumurna, i Pergamo, Tuatira, Cardic, i Piladelpia ki i Laodikia.” 	which said: “Write on a scroll what you see and send it to the seven churches: to Ephesus, Smyrna, Pergamum, Thyatira, Sardis, Philadelphia and Laodicea.”
lacone pe cammo maber owekko dong tye ma pel pel mada 	the man does not eat very well that is why he is too much wasted 
Man doŋ tyen me adekke ma Yecu onyutte kwede bot lupwonnyene, ma doŋ en ocer ki i kin jo muto. 	Jesus came, took the bread and gave it to them, and did the same with the fish.
man en gin ma omiyo jo mogo gua woko ki i niye, ka doŋ gurwatte ki lwak can mapol ata mucorre i komgi. 	For the love of money is a root of all kinds of evil
Nen, cen bino i kome, ci miyo kok cut	A spirit seizes him and he suddenly screams; it throws him into convulsions so that he foams at the mouth
potone twerro nudde maber mada 	the field can be recultivated very well
pwod pa Lubanga 	God's punishment 
dano mogo gicammo lamuro muro 	some people eat pancreas 
lapena ki i lobo pa muni, obeddo cam pa amam keken pe pa dano 	in Europe, pigeon peas is the food for pigeons only not for human beings
acwiny en aye dul kom madit ma tye i is ma ticce aye me yubbo cam ma wacammoni odony i komwa, lwokko remo ki me timmo keda ma bene konynyo me miyo cam donynyo i komwa	liver is a large organ in the abdomen which is concerned with digestion of food 
Kado ber, ento kado ka odoko bot, ci dok gibiyubo niŋniŋ wek odok mamit? Wubed ki kado i iwu, dok wubed ki kuc kekenwu.”	“Salt is good, but if it loses its saltiness, how can you make it salty again? Have salt among yourselves, and be at peace with each other.”
twol tin oriine i gut tyenne 	the snake today wound round his ankle
Lori opotto ci ooyo cat ma otinggo oket ata i yoo ci dano gubino gucokke camnar kwedde mada	a lorry which was carrying boxes of soap overturned and poure out the bars of soap scattering them over the road, the people then came and collected freely as much as they wanted
“Ma doŋ abedo cen pi mwaka mapolpol acito i Jerucalem ka tero mot bot jo me rokka pi konyo lucan, ki ka tyero gitum. 	“After an absence of several years, I came to Jerusalem to bring my people gifts for the poor and to present offerings.
Kare mukene yam giyetowu dok giunowu i nyim lwak, kare mukene bene wuribbe ki jo ma gitimogi kit meno. 	Sometimes you were publicly exposed to insult and persecution; at other times you stood side by side with those who were so treated.
Man aye gin mumiyo ayelle matek, kun acukke ki tekone madwo? ma tye ka tic i iya.	He is the one we proclaim, admonishing and teaching everyone with all wisdom, so that we may present everyone fully mature in Christ.
Ka mwaka me ditte oromo apar wiye aryo, ci gucito kunnu macalo kit me nino madit tye. 	When he was twelve years old, they went up to the festival, according to the custom.
Nam otiŋŋe pi yamo ma onoŋo tye ka kodo. 	When evening came, his disciples went down to the lake,
Jo ducu ma onoŋo gitye kenyo guuro matek kun giwaco ni, “Man twero bedo Lakwar Daudi?” 	Then they brought him a demon-possessed man who was blind and mute, and Jesus healed him, so that he could both talk and see.
“Gitye ki gum jo ma kumo, pien gibikweyo cwinygi. 	Blessed are those who mourn, for they will be comforted.
Ka ce pe iŋut, ci abibino boti oyotoyot, ka doŋ alwenyo kwedgi ki pala lucwan me doga. 	Repent therefore! Otherwise, I will soon come to you and will fight against them with the sword of my mouth.
en mitto mere nyako ma emme juk juk 	he loves a girl whose thighs are very big
Myero doŋ wagiku ŋolo kop woko i kom luwotwa	So then, each of us will give an account of ourselves to God.
ka doŋ wumi dano macalo man bot Catan wek onek kome woko, wek cwinye aye obilarre i nino pa Rwot. 	hand this man over to Satan for the destruction of the flesh, so that his spirit may be saved on the day of the Lord.
wek wupo i kom lok ma lunebi maleŋ yam guloko con, ki i kom cik pa Rwot ma en lalar, ma lukwenawu yam gukelo botwu. 	I want you to recall the words spoken in the past by the holy prophets and the command given by our Lord and Savior through your apostles.
pekone odiyowa mukato kare woko ma pe dok cirre, omiyo pe doŋ wabedo ki gen mo me bedo kwo doki. 	We do not want you to be uninformed, brothers and sisters, about the troubles we experienced in the province of Asia
Ento gibidok i lok man bot Lubaŋa ma oyubbe pi ŋolo kop pa jo makwo ki jo muto. 	For you have spent enough time in the past doing what pagans choose to do—living in debauchery, lust, drunkenness, orgies, carousing and detestable idolatry.
dekke twerro murre 	the sauce can be warmed 
timme ma kiteno pa litino cukul cweerro cwiny lunyodo mada 	such behaviour of the school children do annoy the parents 
dano mogo i kin lumyel gurukko lakac madong nen ki cen calo gutinggo aduku i wiigi 	some people among the dancers, wore very big white ostritch feathers as their head gears and from afar they look as are carrying baskets on thier heads 
tal wic aa ki bot ot nyo kwaaro ma yang wiigi otal, lubbo likwayo 	baldness comes from family or grand parents whose heads were bald and follows grandchildren, in other words, it is genetically inherited
I kare ma ginapita-nu otwi odoŋo, kal oŋok, ci doo bene ocako nen. 	When the wheat sprouted and formed heads, then the weeds also appeared.
Ento ka kare okato manok keken, yamo lapiru mager twatwal ocoro, ma gilwoŋo ni Yurakwilo, okodo nia ki i wi tura. 	Before very long, a wind of hurricane force, called the Northeaster, swept down from the island.
Pilipo yam Labetecaida, ma gaŋgi kacel ki Anderiya ki Petero. 	The first thing Andrew did was to find his brother Simon and tell him, “We have found the Messiah” (that is, the Christ).
lak ma gebbe en aye nennone mit ma katto ka taar dok rom 	intact teeth are good to look at especially if they are white and equal in size
obinno ki geerro mada i kom litino, ni pingo giballo ature ne 	he came with rage against the children for spoiling his flowers 
ony cukari i cai 	put sugar into the tea
ocikogi ni, “Wucit i gaŋ ma tye i nyimwu. Cutcut wubinoŋo kana ma gitweyo, tye gin ki latinne	As they approached Jerusalem and came to Bethphage on the Mount of Olives, Jesus sent two disciples,
buk gumakke kacel  	the books got stuck together
teerre kenne ka tukko odilo 	taking himself by his own means to the football match 
ngayo latin i wii kitanda 	to place the child on his back on the bed, with face upwards
anyeri tele ki anyeri atuya ducu gibeddo i dong kulo kama lagada tye iye ma gicammo 	the long and short tailed reed rats live near the river where there are reeds which they eat
meeggi litino mapol ma ikare man pe gicirro cwiic pa litino  	many present mothers do not stand the sucking of the children
ento ka pa Lubaŋa, ci pe wubiloyogi, wun bene wubinen macalo wulwenyo i kom Lubaŋa!” 	But if it is from God, you will not be able to stop these men; you will only find yourselves fighting against God.”
teng gwiny latin ki odoo 	strike the child's bottom with a stick
tye agwak ma pol ma pat pat, matino me makko oyoo ki ma dongo me makko lee madongo	there are several types of traps: small ones are for the rats and the big ones for the big animals
wotto mere ma yito tye ka duny i dogge 	walking with the smoke coming out of his mouth 
en yam ŋat acel i kin jo apar wiye aryo-ni. Obino ki lwak ma gua bot ajwagi madito pa Lubaŋa ki ludoŋo pa lwak, kun gitye ki pala lucwan ki odoo-gu. 	With him was a large crowd armed with swords and clubs, sent from the chief priests and the elders of the people.
twommo pii ki i wang it 	collecting water from the spring 
pien Icaya yam oloko ni, “Rwot, aŋa ma yam oye lok ma wan watito?” 	But not all the Israelites accepted the good news
ento ki bot jo ma tye ka larre, ŋwecwa obedo gin makwo ma kelo kwo. Aŋa mono ma twero tic man? 	To the one we are an aroma that brings death; to the other, an aroma that brings life
gwetto muyembe opot piny 	getting a mango fruit from the mango tree by knocking it with a stick so as to make it fall down
Ŋat ma ite tye myero owiny lok ma Cwiny Malaŋ oloko bot lwak ducu ma guye an.’	Whoever has ears, let them hear what the Spirit says to the churches.
Guŋulo laa i kome, gukwanyo odoo lagada ci gugoyo ki wiye. 	They stripped him and put a scarlet robe on him,
Kombeddi ciŋ Rwot opoto i komi	Now the hand of the Lord is against you
bongo pa jogga na 	the cloth of my friend 
Yecu olwoŋo lupwonnyene apar wiye aryo bote, ci omiyogi twero me ryemo cen maraco, ki me caŋo kit two ducu kadi wa goro-gu.	Jesus called his twelve disciples to him and gave them authority to drive out impure spirits and to heal every disease and sickness.
Lubaŋa en cwiny, jo ma wore myero guwore i cwiny ki ada.” 	Yet a time is coming and has now come when the true worshipers will worship the Father in the Spirit and in truth, for they are the kind of worshipers the Father seeks.
en pyem pe en aye ma ekwallo 	he objected that he was not the one who stole 
dog latin ojot ki papai ma ocammo 	the child's mouth is smeared with pawpaw which he ate 
piir lok me makke 	plan to arrest him 
Okot dong gigonynyo woko ki i jero 	Okot has been released from the jail
pien awaco botwu ni, ginacoya man myero ocobbe kakare i koma ni, ‘Gikwane kacel ki lubalo’	It is written: ‘And he was numbered with the transgressors’; and I tell you that this must be fulfilled in me
geno bwoyo ngor	he trusts the froth of peas
yub ka beddo meeri pat pe wurib ka beddo 	prepare for yourself a separate place, do not share the place
enwacci ngoo? 	what is he saying? 
ceng merino kern 	the sun enervates the body 
gin monni okatto kany ma komme obeddo agec aloe, myerro obed gec 	some thing passed here with a speckled body, it must be an alligator
dano ma ladidii nyo lagem laremme peke 	a miser has no friend 
cit iwil citam me cilig aryo aryo ikella 	go and buy for me stamps of two shillings each and bring them to me
yiire pe tye 	bewitching is not there
Dano gua ki i gaŋ, gucito bote. 	Then, leaving her water jar, the woman went back to the town and said to the people,
pukko cukari madowong mada i cai mere ka dong matto 	pouring a lot of sugar in his tea and then takes it 
nyaanne ngwec komme dong tik 	the girl has now pungent smell
ento myero wulwor ŋat ma twero neko tipo ki kom ducu i Geena. 	Rather, be afraid of the One who can destroy both soul and body in hell.
i kare me kac abiciko lutic ni, Koŋ wucok doo woko mukwoŋo ci wutwegi woko i dul i dul me awaŋa, ento kal aye wukaa wuket i derona.’” 	At that time I will tell the harvesters: First collect the weeds and tie them in bundles to be burned; then gather the wheat and bring it into my barn.’”
cammi mitte me amedda manok ka wek orom dano 	some more food needs to be added in order to be enough for the the people
kadi beddi ticce tek cukke i tii kwede kit meno 	even though the work is very difficult try hard to do it like that
meno aye to me aryo.” 	This is the second death.”
ka anyayo tong gweno aryo wang aryo ci dokko agwen 	lit if I increased two eggs by two it becomes four
oywelo yatte yom pe ber apaya me jami ot 	the wood of oywelo is soft and not good for making them into furniture for houses
kec nekko 	he is hungry 
opotto ki pikipiki ci oturro oloto tyenne woko 	he fell off a motor cycle and broke his leg
twar winyo woko ki i poto kal	drive the birds away from the millet field
ngat mape tye ki ot aduc meerre myerro pe obed ki ludito pien en pud Latin	a person who has not built his small hut, should not stay with the elders because he is still a child
Gibedo ka keto cwinygi ka winyo lokke, pien obedo kwedgi pi kare malac kun miyo giuro tim jokjokke. 	They followed him because he had amazed them for a long time with his sorcery.
ngat ma tye nono mope tye ka pwony en aye obin 	the one who is not teaching is the one who should come
tyeng kidi me reggo 	roughen the stone for grinding by knocking it with another hard stone to make it rough
Dok alego Lubaŋa ni meno, mar mewu myero odoŋ omedde ameda i ŋec kikome ki niaŋ matut, 	God can testify how I long for all of you with the affection of Christ Jesus.
i kare ma wunyomme ni ononggo pe wumitte mada? 	the time when you were married did you not like each other very much? 
Ka doŋ gukato loka ca, ci gukato i wi tura i lobo Genecaret. 	Then those who were in the boat worshiped him, saying, “Truly you are the Son of God.”
Wuki, wuleg Lubaŋa, wek pe wudony i abita mo	Watch and pray so that you will not fall into temptation
kikopo man ducu twerro genynye woko ka giwekkongi guoo piny ki kama giketto gi iye 	all these cups will break completely if they are left to fall from where they are placed now
litino Lemon man twerro nakke 	these lemon seedlings can be transplanted
cam meeri pat pien en pe cammo cam ma in icammoni 	his food is different because he does not eat the same food as you
joo macon yang gilwenynyo ki atero 	in the past the old people used to fight with arrows
pun dano mape cammo maber beddo ma ojwer 	a malnourished person has small calves
kun waco ni, “Tin-ni ka kono iŋeyo lok ma kelo kuc boti, kono ber! Ento koni gikano woko ki boti. 	and said, “If you, even you, had only known on this day what would bring you peace—but now it is hidden from your eyes.
An aye Jon, ŋat ma yam owinyo lok man dok oneno gin magi ducu. 	I, John, am the one who heard and saw these things
abil abil otyeko kodi	let me taste, let me taste, finishes the seeds
Ci olworo waŋe wek enen ŋat ma ogude-ni. 	But Jesus kept looking around to see who had done it.
Lewic pe maka pi lok me kwena maber, ma en aye teko pa Lubaŋa me laro jo ma tye ki niye, mukwoŋo Lujudaya, ka doŋ Lugrik bene. 	That is why I am so eager to preach the gospel also to you who are in Rome.
Doŋ me dok i lok ma wucoyo waraga bota pire, bedo ber ka laco mo pe ogudo dako, 	Now for the matters you wrote about: “It is good for a man not to have sexual relations with a woman.”
wukekko it dano	you disturb people with your noises
Tye leb mapol ma kitgi patpat i wi lobo, ento pe tye mo ma te lokke pe. 	Undoubtedly there are all sorts of languages in the world, yet none of them is without meaning.
tye gin mo ma bodde ma miyo en pe tiyo ticce maber 	there must be something that distracts him, which makes him not do his work well
Pien doŋ ginyuto akemo pa Lubaŋa woko ki i polo pi tim pa jo maraco ducu ma pe giworo Lubaŋa, ma gitye ka geŋo lok ada ni pe oti tic, pi timgi maraco. 	For in the gospel the righteousness of God is revealed—a righteousness that is by faith from first to last, just as it is written: “The righteous will live by faith.”
labwor We ka yenynyo i tee lum 	the lion is swelling up under the grass and ready to fight 
lyerro bongo wii tol 	hanging the clothes on the line  
Ka ce ciŋi nyo tyeni aye miyo ipoto i bal, ci toŋ iŋun ibol woko	If your hand or your foot causes you to stumble, cut it off and throw it away
latin oaa ka tukko i lwala, nen kit ma bongo ne kwaar kwedde 	the child has been playing in the red soil, look how his clothes are soiled 
lum en aye gin ma twii ki i ngom ci pe donggo ma bocco twatwal, tye ki potte ma lakit lee ducu cammo ma ka lum pekke ci lee bene beddo pekke 	grass is a plant which grows from the ground and does not grow very tall but has leaves which, animals of all kinds eat and if there is no grass there will also be no animals  
nyako ma poor woko ki i ganggi ki lacoo, noggo ganggi pe tye maber 	a girl who elopes from her home, it meams that her home is not good
romo ki dyel gitye ka twomme 	the ram and he-goat are butting each other 
En ceŋ tara ma gicwinyo, ma lyel, yam wumito bedo ki yomcwiny pi kare manok i dero macce. 	“You have sent to John and he has testified to the truth.
buk litino wek guring woko 	shout at the children to make them run away
Lok man pyem mo pe iye, wun doŋ myero wubed mot, pe wutim gin mo ki kurokuro. 	Therefore, since these facts are undeniable, you ought to calm down and not do anything rash.
gipiny meeri tye kwene? 	where are your belongings? 
I adane wan wabedo i lobo, ento pe watye ka lweny ki jami lweny me lobo. 	I beg you that when I come I may not have to be as bold as I expect to be toward some people who think that we live by the standards of this world.
An ki Won wan acel.” 	My Father, who has given them to me, is greater than all; no one can snatch them out of my Father’s hand.
ayita ringo mot geno ode	the ground squirrel runs slowly because it trusts its hole which is nearby
kom agulu pii tye ka motto pii mada	the water pot is now being soaked with water
pe watye ki latok dek ma nyonyo nyo kono agwadeko keken 	we do not have a metal ladle except the calabash cup
ojakke matek ka lokke ci owekko opotto piny 	he turned round suddenly with force and that made hire fall down
Ka ce waŋi tuŋ lacuc aye ma miyo ipoto i bal, kol ci ibol woko ka mabor	If your right eye causes you to stumble, gouge it out and throw it away
wek apokapoka mo obed pe i kom, ento omi dul acel acel opar pi dul wadgi. 	so that there should be no division in the body, but that its parts should have equal concern for each other.
notto muyembe 	to suck sucking the mangoes
dano ma wiye lawitiwiti ma tiyo jami woko oyot oyot en aye dano ma mitte me beddo latel wii dano 	a person who is very active and does things quickly is the one who is wanted to be the leader of the people
jub kal matye woko i dyekal ikel i ot, pien dyel koni cammo woko 	collect the millet from outside the compound and bring it into the house because the goats will eat it
ceng potto cawa apar wiye aryo 	the sun sets at six 
wek wabam i kom man, ma ka doŋ watyeko rukone, ci pe gibinoŋowa watye munero. 	Meanwhile we groan, longing to be clothed instead with our heavenly dwelling,
jub pull ikella amwoddi 	bring me some groundnuts in your hands for me to eat 
Ka ce yam otimo gin mo marac i komi, nyo tye ki banyani mo, kwan magi ducu i wiya. 	So if you consider me a partner, welcome him as you would welcome me.
dano mo ma lane okato kany odok tung piny kwica 	a light brown skin person passed here and walked down there
ento Paulo otamo ni pe dok ber me tero dano ma yam oa owekogi i Pampulia, pe woto kwedgi i dog tic. 	but Paul did not think it wise to take him, because he had deserted them in Pamphylia and had not continued with them in the work.
piny tin muttu  	there is no moon light today
latinne kitte rac, ka onenno dano ci manne kanne woko 	the child is very bad, when he sees the people he goes round and hidies himself
“Won an kikoma yam atamo ni myero ati matek pi lweny ki nyiŋ Yecu me Najaret. 	“I too was convinced that I ought to do all that was possible to oppose the name of Jesus of Nazareth.
moko mungati ma ginywango dong tye ka yeny 	the wheat flour which was kneaded (dough) is now getting big
oye lok ma memba me Ot Kacokke Madit oyubbo 	he consented to what the members of Parliament have passed 
Tek pa Lubaŋa tiyo i yo mapatpat, ento Lubaŋa acel-lu aye ma tiyo i yo ducu ki pi jo ducu. 	There are different kinds of working, but in all of them and in everyone it is the same God at work.
nyanne lapidi maber mada  	the girl is a very good children's maid
lyelle tye kwene? 	where is his her grave? or where is the grave? 
ringone ocek pun coo 	the meat cooked is not quite soft but firm like man's calf
Ajwagi madito gupiyo lwak ni twara gigonnyigi Baraba. 	But the chief priests stirred up the crowd to have Pilate release Barabbas instead.
maarro cammo moo twatwal omiyo ocwee twatwal 	loves eating fats that is why he is very fat
wallo lum ma i wang pii	gathering and removing the grass from the water well
gucitto ka gweddo boo	they went to pluck cowpeas' leaves
Juda ma pe me Keriot openye ni, “Rwot, man bibedo niŋniŋ, ni ibinyutte keni botwa, ento pe bot lobo?” 	The one who loves me will be loved by my Father, and I too will love them and show myself to them.”
Pien gin yam gupwonyowa pi kare manok mo keken i kit ma gin guneno ni ber, ento Lubaŋa pwonyowa pi konyowa, wek omi wadok jo maleŋ macalo en. 	They disciplined us for a little while as they thought best; but God disciplines us for our good, in order that we may share in his holiness.
it kom malo 	lift the chair up
royo tol i libira nyo i kinyo 	threading the needle
en meere mitto cuti me lad keken 	he only wants silk suits
tee tyenne ki yat 	slightly cut or scarify his leg and put medicine into it 
nwoo peny aye pien pe ikatto 	repeat the examination again because you did not pass
onekke nono 	he killed him for no reason
Nyo itwero waco bot omeru niŋniŋ ni, ‘Wek akwany cuŋ kal ma tye i waŋi-ni woko’ kun in bene dul yat tye i waŋi? 	“Why do you look at the speck of sawdust in your brother’s eye and pay no attention to the plank in your own eye?
citto ka rukko bongo 	going to put on a dress 
jwi jwi ni wii barri pigo pe icitto ka nenno dakta wek omii yat pirre? 	you are always having headache, why don't you go to see the doctor so that he may give you medicine for it?
Ki ŋat ma ogamo ciliŋ alip aryo-ni bene onoŋo magoba ciliŋ alip aryo. 	So also, the one with two bags of gold gained two more.
labwor janynyo yer komme 	the lion makes its mane stand up 
pali mabor 	a pair of long trousers 
ngeyo kutto lure mada 	knows how to play the flute very well 
ruddo kom agulu nio ka ryeny mada 	to polish the pot until it is very bright or polishes the pot until it is very bright 
lokke tonno cwinynye mada 	the matter offends him very much
Gititte ni, “Meni ki omegini gitye gucuŋ woko, gimito neni.” 	Someone told him, “Your mother and brothers are standing outside, wanting to see you.”
opotto nigning? 	how did it fall? 
ka lakko bongo tye kwene? 	where is a place for rinsing the clothes? 
An Paulo akok botwu kun abako doga, an ma giwaco ni amwol dok awor bene ka atye kacel kwedwu, ento abedo ger ka atye woko cen. Alegowu i lok man pi mwolo dok pi kica pa Kricito. 	So we fix our eyes not on what is seen, but on what is unseen, since what is seen is temporary, but what is unseen is eternal.
Wan pe wamedo ka gikwa, calo pe gipoko botwa me o botwu, pien wan aye ma yam wakwoŋo bino botwu me tito lok me kwena maber i kom Kricito. 	Such people should realize that what we are in our letters when we are absent, we will be in our actions when we are present.
waitto wa i wii cere ka dong wanngeyo kama watye iye, reabout	we climbed up to the hill top when then we knew our whe
Onoŋo Pilato oŋeyo ni ajwagi madito gumiyo Yecu bote pi nyeko. 	knowing it was out of self-interest that the chief priests had handed Jesus over to him.
gweni tye ka botto poto anyogi ma pud gutwii alwiya 	the chicken are eating the leaves of the freshly grown maize
Ento Yecu opucce woko ki i dyegi, ci ocito gire. 	But he walked right through the crowd and went on his way.
oganno jami maca mape wacce 	he marvelled very much at those things 
Pien onoŋo yam amito awok botwu i wotta i Makedonia, ki i dwogona ki kunnu, wek wukonya i wotta me cito i Judaya. 	Because I was confident of this, I wanted to visit you first so that you might benefit twice.
Ento wod pa aŋecani yam ginywalo i kit me kom, ki latin pa dako kikome-ni ginywalo pi cikke ma yam Lubaŋa ociko. 	For it is written that Abraham had two sons, one by the slave woman and the other by the free woman.
jwat gwinynye  	strike her buttocks
Pe kit meno! Ci wan ma doŋ yam wato tuŋ bot bal dok watwero bedo kwo iye niŋniŋ? 	What shall we say, then? Shall we go on sinning so that grace may increase?
Ka gukatti woko ki i pii, Cwiny pa Rwot otiŋo Pilipo, otero woko, laco ma gikolo-ni pe dok onene, ci owoto wotte ki yomcwiny. 	When they came up out of the water, the Spirit of the Lord suddenly took Philip away, and the eunuch did not see him again, but went on his way rejoicing.
ladit tye ka jwaat twatwal pi lwak dyangine ma orwenynyo 	the old man is clicking his mouth in grief for the loss of many of his cattle
wek wubed laboŋo lok mo ma loyowu, ma bal mo bene pe i cwinywu, litino pa Lubaŋa ma bal mo pe i komwu liweŋ i kin lwak jo me kare-ni ma guballe woko-ni. Wutye ka ryeny i lobo i kin dano calo lakalatwe, 	Do everything without grumbling or arguing,
Nyo wutamo ni, lok ma yam gicoyo lok ma tere pe ni, “En tye ki par madwoŋ twatwal ki nyeko i kom cwiny ma yam en oketo ni obed i iwa?” 	Or do you think Scripture says without reason that he jealously longs for the spirit he has caused to dwell in us?
Lupwonnye meno aryo guwinyo kun waco lok man, ci gulubo Yecu. 	When he saw Jesus passing by, he said, “Look, the Lamb of God!”
nyaanne ojwar matek 	the girl is very tall 
Ka nojogi oloyogi, ci guywayo Yacon ki utmego mogo guterogi i nyim luloc me gaŋ kun gidaŋŋe ni, “Jo man gitito gin mapat, gitye ka loko tam pa dano me lobo woko, gubino kwede wa kany. 	But when they did not find them, they dragged Jason and some other believers before the city officials, shouting: “These men who have caused trouble all over the world have now come here,
nga omiine ic 	who has impregnated her?
awakke bene matek piwu. Cwinya okwe maber, dok apoŋ ki yomcwiny i canwa ducu. 	I have spoken to you with great frankness; I take great pride in you
kany pe kabeddo me tyet 	is not a place for divination or prophecy 
Yecu Kricito gire kite tye acel keken laworo ki tin ki nino ma pe tum. 	Jesus Christ is the same yesterday and today and forever.
gununogi ki lok mape dong gitwerro lok 	they repeated the same words over and over to them in such a way that they were unable to talk
giwekko mejane orri i wii ceng twatwal owekko okak woko 	the table was left too long in the sun, that is why it split
geerro pe ber 	cruelty is not good 
i kit yo ducu ki i kabedo ducu, wan bene wajolo ki yomcwiny madwoŋ, ladit. 	Everywhere and in every way, most excellent Felix, we acknowledge this with profound gratitude.
Orwone gudwogo i gogo, kun giweko wegi aguragura gumedde ki wot kwede. 	The next day they let the cavalry go on with him, while they returned to the barracks.
Lok mukwoŋo aciki ni, bako dog, lega, lega ma gilego pi jo mukene, ki miyo pwoc, myero gitim pi dano ducu, 	The sins of some are obvious, reaching the place of judgment ahead of them; the sins of others trail behind them.
jwayo lak 	brushing the teeth
Luparicayo gupenyo Yecu ni, “Ker pa Lubaŋa bibino awene?” En odok iye botgi ni, “Ker pe Lubaŋa pe bibino ki lanyut ma gineno. 	Once, on being asked by the Pharisees when the kingdom of God would come, Jesus replied, “The coming of the kingdom of God is not something that can be observed,
leg ladit ticci wek omiini yweyo mo manok 	request your master to give you a short holiday 
locco ma dong kwanynyo kuc pa dano woko pe ber 	ruling that takes away the peace of the people is not good 
notto agulu mapud dyak ma gitye ka cweyone	denting the wet pot which is being made with a pattern
wiye tek 	he is bold
gitye ka larro wang poto meega 	they are disputing or quarrelling about the boundary of their fields
En pe Lubaŋa pa jo muto ento en Lubaŋa pa jo makwo	He is not the God of the dead, but of the living
Agripa owaco bot Festo ni, “An kikoma amito winyo lok pa danonu ka twerre.” Ogamo ni, “Diki ibiwinyo lokke.” 	Then Agrippa said to Festus, “I would like to hear this man myself.” He replied, “Tomorrow you will hear him.”
yatte ngokko dano  	the medicine makes people vomit or it causes vomiting
mon maarro kiteyi teyi arkii mada 	women love silk frocks very much
joo mogo pe gimaaro odii gwen 	some people do not like ground white ant paste 
Doŋ luker me wi lobo ma yam gutimo abor kwede, ma gulubo timme me tarwaŋ, gibikok pire kun gidoŋo oduru ma noŋo ginene doŋ tye ka waŋ i mac kun yitone duny. 	“When the kings of the earth who committed adultery with her and shared her luxury see the smoke of her burning, they will weep and mourn over her.
tiyo kello pekko	to get old brings problems 
kun gikelo lucaden me goba ma giwaco ni, “Laco man pe weko loko lok marac ma kemo kabedo man maleŋ ki cik pa Moses, 	They produced false witnesses, who testified, “This fellow never stops speaking against this holy place and against the law.
Lapur ma en latic matek i potone en aye ma myero okwoŋ camo gin ma ocek iye. 	Similarly, anyone who competes as an athlete does not receive the victor’s crown except by competing according to the rules.
latin gwinynyo dudde twatwal myero obed ki olwinyo 	this child scratches too much his bottom, he must have hookworms
Man te lokke ni, pe litino ma ginywalogi i kit pa dano ma gin aye gibedo litino pa Lubaŋa, ento litino ma ginywalogi pi cikke pa Lubaŋa aye gilwoŋogi ni gin likwayo. 	On the contrary, “It is through Isaac that your offspring will be reckoned.”
obeddo It nyany i wii kom caa 	he sat there comfortably on the chair 
owaco botgi ni, “Yam gicoyo kit man ni, Kricito ma Lubaŋa oyero myero onen can, ci i nino me adekke myero ocer ki i kin jo muto, 	Then he opened their minds so they could understand the Scriptures.
I kare ma ayubo kit meno onoŋo pe abedo ka cabbe acaba i lokka. Pe ayubo macalo dano mo ma koŋ ye, ka dok kwero woko. 	I wanted to visit you on my way to Macedonia and to come back to you from Macedonia, and then to have you send me on my way to Judea.
lammo dog i nyim jok wek okel gum 	praying for god's blessing 
Ka dok owaco bot lapwonnye meno ni, “Nen meni.” Nia i cawa meno lapwonnye meno otere paco, ogwoke. 	When Jesus saw his mother there, and the disciple whom he loved standing nearby, he said to her, “Woman, here is your son,”
kot ocakke woko dong	the rain has started already
aballo ticca woko	I have ruined my work 
Waŋ it pa Yakobo onoŋo tye kunnu	So he came to a town in Samaria called Sychar, near the plot of ground Jacob had given to his son Joseph.
gitye ka nangge i tukko meegi lawala 	the children are having a competition in their game of lawala
bioo awene 	when will he come?
ma iyubo i nyim rok ducu, 	which you have prepared in the sight of all nations:
tweer me tinggo gin ma pek kit man aa pi cam maber ki tiyo tic mukene mapol 	the ability to carry heavy things like this comes as a result of good feeding and exercises
Ka ce omeru nyo lameru boŋone pe, kun cam me nino ducu bene remo, 	Suppose a brother or a sister is without clothes and daily food.
Lumegine ducu pe gitye kacel kwedwa kany? Ci dano-ni onoŋo kit man ducu ki kwene?” 	Aren’t all his sisters with us? Where then did this man get all these things?”
Ento ka ŋat mo pe oketo lok man i tam, pe bene gibeketo tam i kome. 	But if anyone ignores this, they will themselves be ignored.
agerre i komgi, ayelogi wa i gaŋi pa lurok. 	I was so obsessed with persecuting them that I even hunted them down in foreign cities.
Cel onoŋo gigero ki jacipa, ki gaŋ mere gigero ki jabu keken, ma noŋo nen maleŋ calo kiyo. 	The wall was made of jasper, and the city of pure gold, as pure as glass.
ocitto ka ngiyo acikari kama gitye kadorre iye 	he went to inspect the police where they are drilling
Pien wun wutye kacel ki lucan kare ducu, ento pe wubibedo kweda kare ducu. 	The poor you will always have with you, but you will not always have me.
Man aye gin mumiyo aloko kwedgi i carolok, pien kadi neno piny pe gineno, kadi winyo lok bene pe giwinyo, dok bene pe giniaŋ. 	This is why I speak to them in parables: “Though seeing, they do not see; though hearing, they do not hear or understand.
Lim ber mada makatto ka wutye i tim, pien miyo wutitte, ki lok ma ngat man owinynyo ma as pace 	visiting is very good especially if you are in a foreign country, because it makes you tell each other, what news one has heard from home
obakko dogge pi roc ma otimmo	he begged for forgiveness for his mistake
ma Lubaŋa Won aye muyerogi pi yubbe ma en oŋeyo con, ma Cwiny mere Maleŋ do? olonyogi gudoko maleŋ wek guwiny lok pa Yecu Kricito, dok bene wek gikir remone i komgi: Kica ki kuc myero omedde botwu. 	Peter, an apostle of Jesus Christ, To God’s elect, exiles scattered throughout the provinces of Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia and Bithynia,
Ka ce leyo jami ma gimiyo ki Abraim obedo pi cik, meno noŋo pe lubo kit cikke mo. Ento Lubaŋa yam omiyo bot Abraim i gicikke macalo mot. 	He redeemed us in order that the blessing given to Abraham might come to the Gentiles through Christ Jesus, so that by faith we might receive the promise of the Spirit.
gwor bur man wek obed malac 	make this hole wide by digging it
an abimiye latwok bene. 	I will also give that one the morning star.
mwolo, gwokke ken	But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, forbearance, kindness, goodness, faithfulness,
an apenye i nyimwu, ci nen, pe anoŋo kop mo marac i kome i kom lok ducu ma wudote kwede	I have examined him in your presence and have found no basis for your charges against him.
dano pe maarro ngalla 	people do not love to despise others 
ento dano ma odobo Wod pa dano-ni bineno can mada! Kono nene obedo ber ka dano-nu pe ginywalo.” 	But woe to that man who betrays the Son of Man! It would be better for him if he had not been born.”
gwanaa ne giteddo ci ocek guru guru 	the cassava was cooked but was not yet soft 
pwon mayembe ki kom yatte i cam 	pluck the mangoes from their tree and eat 
tye ki tweer me makki 	has the power to arrest you 
latinne wive rac mitto kong gigwiny matek 	the child is too rude, he should be pinched very hard 
roddo agulu	to pile up pots on top of one another
Ka laloyo ocime ni oloki, Paulo odok iye ni, “Ladit, aŋeyo ni ibedo ka ŋolo kop i rok man pi mwaka malac, mumiyo apido lokka i nyimi ki yomcwiny. 	When the governor motioned for him to speak, Paul replied: “I know that for a number of years you have been a judge over this nation; so I gladly make my defense.
Ci obedo kunnu mwaka acel ki dwe abicel kun pwonyo lok pa Lubaŋa i kingi. 	So Paul stayed in Corinth for a year and a half, teaching them the word of God.
lar latin can ma opotto i pii ma dong tye ka muny woko ni 	save that child who has fallen into the water and is about to drown 
Petero oa, owoto kwedgi	Peter went with them, and when he arrived he was taken upstairs to the room
We ka ceerro yeya 	stirring the water so that the fish under the water may come out to be caught 
ai Lubanga na miya gum 	oh my God bless me!
Won omaro Wod, ci omiyo jami ducu i ciŋe. 	For the one whom God has sent speaks the words of God, for God gives the Spirit without limit.
danone lacorre 	he is a man who always tries to do what he cannot do
en pi kara ki kare citto ka kwan ki wot me nonggo teko 	from time to time he goes to swim and to walk so as to get strength
pele pa latin meno owekko opotto oturo tyene 	the restlessness of the child made her fall and broke his leg 
Levi oweko jamine ducu, oa olubo kore. 	“Follow me,” Jesus said to him,
wangge ocung komme 	his eyes were fixed on him
pe ber latin me ngiyo ki odoo	it it is not good for the child to get used to beating 
Doŋ gin marac onen, pe i kom ticwa man keken ma gilanyo pire, ento wa ot me woro lubaŋawa madit, Atemi, bene pire doŋ biboto woko, ki deyone bene gibikwanyo woko, en ma dano i lobo Acia ki me lobo ducu giworo-ni.” 	There is danger not only that our trade will lose its good name, but also that the temple of the great goddess Artemis will be discredited; and the goddess herself, who is worshiped throughout the province of Asia and the world, will be robbed of her divine majesty.”
putto gwana 	uprooting the cassava
laor myerro nino ducu beddo kama cok ma ginogge iye oyot oyot 	a messenger must always be near where he can be found easily 
Ento en owaccigi ni, “Atye ki cam ma acamo ma wun pe wuŋeyo.” 	Meanwhile his disciples urged him, “Rabbi, eat something.”
ka camo riŋo kom luker, ki riŋo kom ludito wi mony, ki riŋo kom jo ma yam gin oteka, riŋo aguragura ki riŋo kom jo ma ŋweco kwedgi, ki riŋo dano ducu, jo ma gilone kengi kacel ki opii, jo matino ki madito ducu.” 	so that you may eat the flesh of kings, generals, and the mighty, of horses and their riders, and the flesh of all people, free and slave, great and small.”
Kare ma tye myero iti kwede i yo maber, pien nino me kare-ni opoŋ ki gin marac. 	This is why it is said: “Wake up, sleeper, rise from the dead, and Christ will shine on you.”
acitto kunno ci abillo bene pekko ma dano gitye kwede kunno	I went there and I experienced the problem which the people have there 
bil ka kado tye i dekke 	taste whether there is salt in the food
lacoo obinno ma odee ki laa labet bet 	a man came adorned with a well made soft animal skin
odoone twerro tuure 	the stick can be broken 
olarro bot rwot ka dot 	he ran to the chief to lodge an accusation
Bot jo mukene-gu, an kikoma aye ma atye ka lok, pe Rwot gire, ni, ka ce Lakricitayo mo tye ki dakone ma pe oye Yecu, ka dako-nu oye me medde ki bedo kwede, laco pe myero oryeme woko. 	To the rest I say this (I, not the Lord): If any brother has a wife who is not a believer and she is willing to live with him, he must not divorce her.
I cabit ma olubo pol dano ma i gaŋ meno gucorre gugurre kacel pi winy lok pa Lubaŋa. 	On the next Sabbath almost the whole city gathered to hear the word of the Lord.
Utmego, myero wuŋe ni, pi dano man en aye Lubaŋa weko bal pa dano, 	“Therefore, my friends, I want you to know that through Jesus the forgiveness of sins is proclaimed to you.
pe nino ka gad mo ma twarro tye ka ngette 	he does not sleep, if there is somebody who snores, near him
dako myerro pe obed ki tam me Ile me ic i cwinynye ka time ki coo atata pien is as pi time ma kit meno 	a woman must not think of aborting if she runs about with men because pregnancy comes as a result of such behaviour
teer Lodi mac wek oket i pac me goyo bongone 	take the glowing charcoal so that he may put into the iron box for ironing clothes
tud uno i ngut dyel 	knot the rope around the neck of the goat
Ka ce Demetrio ki lutet gitye ki lok adot i kom ŋat mo, lukiko tye, luloyo bene gitye	If, then, Demetrius and his fellow craftsmen have a grievance against anybody, the courts are open and there are proconsuls
kweyo ma opong i wang itti tika twerro olle 	can the sand that has filled up the water well be cleared?
yeer wiye dong omalle woko ki twoo ma otwooyo matek twatwal 	his head-hair has become red as a result of his long illness
rwac piny 	throw down 
Can muikwoŋo doŋ okato. Nen, can aryo mukene pud odoŋ ma myero obin. 	The first woe is past; two other woes are yet to come.
Lubaŋa Wonwa ki Rwotwa Yecu Kricito omiwu kica ki kuc. 	Paul and Timothy, servants of Christ Jesus, To all God’s holy people in Christ Jesus at Philippi, together with the overseers and deacons:
Laco man Lujudaya aye gumako, onoŋo doŋ gicok neke woko, ka acito botgi ki lumony alare ki i ciŋgi, pien onoŋo aniaŋ ni en Laroma. 	This man was seized by the Jews and they were about to kill him, but I came with my troops and rescued him, for I had learned that he is a Roman citizen.
top pa duo as pi gwok marac 	rotting of meat comes as a result of poor preservation
jami duu ma watiyo, watiyo pi mid mewa 	whatever we do, we do it for our government 
rwoo woko i pyem me rette	to withdraw from the games of wrestling because of fear or cowardice
lok ma gunynye agunynya ki tegge kit meno nino ducu pe beddo atir 	the matter that increases from outside like that always is not quite right
ci ooro luticce me cito ka lwoŋo jo ma onoŋo yam gilwoŋogi i karama meno, ento gukwero bino woko. 	“The kingdom of heaven is like a king who prepared a wedding banquet for his son.
“Nen, nyako mo ma peya oŋeyo laco biyac, binywalo latin ma laco, gibicako nyiŋe Emmanuel”, te lokke ni, Lubaŋa tye kwedwa. 	“The virgin will conceive and give birth to a son, and they will call him Immanuel” (which means “God with us”).
rib joo matye ka daani 	reconcile those who are quarrelling
iye otweene woko ' 	he is constipated
danone twerro ngoone 	the man can be beaten 
gaa matye ka teddo? 	who is cooking? 
guotto ni dwaar arum bibeddo i Amuro dikki 	they have called people to come tomorrow to go to Amuro for the arum hunt of surrounding the animals
Luparicayo ki lupwony-cik gua ki i Jerucalem gubino bot Yecu, ci gupenye ni, 	For whoever does the will of my Father in heaven is my brother and sister and mother.”
olang mit mada me acamma 	the kidney is very tasty for eating 
miyo litino me woo i kilaci pe ber 	to allow the children to shout in the class is not good 
Lee makwo mukwoŋo onoŋo nen calo labwor, ki me aryone onoŋo nen calo twon, lee makwo me adekke waŋe nen calo waŋ dano, ki lee makwo me aŋwenne onoŋo nen calo ocur ma tye ka tuk. 	The first living creature was like a lion, the second was like an ox, the third had a face like a man, the fourth was like a flying eagle.
werro wic macol	to dye the hair black
lalibbo  	one who lays in waiting
Nen, dano mo obino bot Yecu kun penye ni, “Lapwony, atim gin aŋo maber wek alim kwo ma pe tum?” 	Just then a man came up to Jesus and asked, “Teacher, what good thing must I do to get eternal life?”
citto ka rweene i cuk	to go for a walk to the market
komme gum pi weene woko oyot oyot kono tong ocubbe	he was lucky to duck away quickly to avoid being speared 
lwak rok mukene dong pe gingeyo puur ki kweri 	many people of other tribes do not know how to cultivate with hoes
jwik pa ratiline dong beddo awene?  	when will the reduction of its weight be?
Ci oketo cwinye ka nenogi, kun geno ni gibimiye gin mo. 	So the man gave them his attention, expecting to get something from them.
ocom i komme ni gek 	he met him suddenly by surprise 
I kare meno jo mapol bipoto, gibiketo lok roro i kingi gidotte kekengi, dok gibibedo ki adagadaga i kingi kekengi. 	At that time many will turn away from the faith and will betray and hate each other,
pe ipii litino ka lweny 	don't incite the children to fight
latin dong ongiyo woko ki odoo	the child is now used to beating, he does not fear it any more
ogwal nino ducu tadde wii pii 	the frog always lies spreading out on the surface of the water
Ŋat ma olonyogi bedo maleŋ, ki jo ma gilonyogi-ni, gin ducu gua i kom ŋat acel	Both the one who makes people holy and those who are made holy are of the same family
Iwok kwanynyo kwkii ma tye i del kom woko 	bathing removes the germs on and under the skin
ci gin ducu guket woko ata i lobo ducu me Judaya ki Camaria, lukwena keken aye gudoŋ. 	On that day a great persecution broke out against the church in Jerusalem, and all except the apostles were scattered throughout Judea and Samaria.
Opokke kwedgi ma rom ki ka ma gibayo iye lakidi, ci otumo coŋe piny, olego ni, 	He withdrew about a stone’s throw beyond them, knelt down and prayed,
latek dwong mada i ot jokon	there is a lot too much soot in the kitchen
Awaco man wek ŋat mo pe oŋakwu ki pyem me gobagoba me bwola. 	in whom are hidden all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge.
ci otimme i kare pa Kalaudio ma laloc madit. 	(This happened during the reign of Claudius.)
latin ma lakke pud peya otwii kayo ni gwak 	a child whose teeth has not yet erupted bites lightly 
Pien gucako wotgi pi nyiŋ Kricito, pe gugamo gin mo ki bot jo ma pe guye Lubaŋa. 	Dear friend, you are faithful in what you are doing for the brothers and sisters, even though they are strangers to you.
latunge ki remo	the goat with blood on its horns
En otiyo gin ma en twero	She did what she could
wallo lum ki i poto 	gathering grass from the field 
ginne twerro nenne ka i cung ki tung kwica 	the thing can be seen if you stand on the other side 
wutit bot won ot ni, ‘Lapwony penyi ni, Ot welo tye kwene, ka ma abicamo iye cam me Kato kacel ki lupwonnyena?’ 	and say to the owner of the house, ‘The Teacher asks: Where is the guest room, where I may eat the Passover with my disciples?’
labot kilwongo ka dek wi kot	bachelor is called to a meal in the rain
giyorro pii i wii latwoo ma owille wek ocoo	the water is sprinkled or poured on the head of an unconscious patient so that he might gain his consciousness  
I kom nino mukwoŋo me nino madito me Mugati ma Tobi Pe iye, ma gitumo iye latin romo me Kato, lupwonnye gupenye ni, “Imito waciyubbi kabedo mene wek icam iye Kato?” 	On the first day of the Festival of Unleavened Bread, when it was customary to sacrifice the Passover lamb, Jesus’ disciples asked him, “Where do you want us to go and make preparations for you to eat the Passover?”
Ci ginyono bur me biyo olok meno woko i ŋe gaŋ, remo omol ki i bur me biyo olok, ma borre romo mairo miya aryo, ki tute piny onoŋo mito romo cokcok futi abic.	They were trampled in the winepress outside the city, and blood flowed out of the press, rising as high as the horses’ bridles for a distance of 1,600 stadia.
gwar yugi man iony woko 	gather this rubbish and throw it away 
in ladit pe itwerro Iweny ki latin 	you are old you cannot fight with the child 
man en aye latin me abic madong guoo	this is the fifth child who has already arrived
jub oboke ducu ma kany icionygi woko 	collect all the leaves which are here and pour them outside 
lyerro bongo wii tol 	to hang the clothes on the line to dry
en mumiyo awacciwu ni, en bikwanyo gin ma tuŋ bota, nyuttiwu. 	All that belongs to the Father is mine
obuccu gweno 	he plucked a chicken 
Ento kombeddi, ma watye ka yelle wamito gikwanwa ni kitwa atir pi Kricito, ka wan kikomwa dok ginoŋo ni wan lubalo, ci Kricito mono obedo lakwena me tic pi bal? Adadaneni pe kumeno! 	So we, too, have put our faith in Christ Jesus that we may be justified by faith in Christ and not by the works of the law, because by the works of the law no one will be justified.
En yam ocweyo rok ducu nia ki i kom dano acel wek gubed i wi lobo ma onoŋo en omoko kare kikome ma myero gubed iye, ki waŋ apokki lobo me kabedogi, 	From one man he made all the nations, that they should inhabit the whole earth; and he marked out their appointed times in history and the boundaries of their lands.
nakko lak pe gin ma myerro gituk kwedde, pien ka ngat matye ki twoo me cweer pa remmo ci kello pekko mada 	extraction of the tooth must not be taken for granted, because if the person has bleeding tendency disease, a big problem may ensue
teerre 	take it to him
yokko wiye i kom ot 	knocking his head against the wall of the house 
ojwetto ngwec matek mada 	he showed a clean pair of heels
juurro lac i ot 	passing a large quantity of urine in the house 
tunggo lee woko ki i dog kulo 	frigtening off the animal from the river
ojwayo war maleng maryeny mada 	he polished the shoes very well and they are shining
lok angoo?, lok pe 	what news?, no news 
makko kit timme pa wonne  	inheriting the behaviour of his father
ngom twerro tulle ma golio yoo 	the heap of earth can be made across the road
gwok wulwor.” 	But Jesus immediately said to them: “Take courage! It is I
Oyotoyot Yecu ocako niaŋ ki i cwinye kene ni gitye ki pyem ma kit meno i cwinygi, ci openyogi ni, “Piŋo cwinywu tye ka pyem lok macalo man? 	Immediately Jesus knew in his spirit that this was what they were thinking in their hearts, and he said to them, “Why are you thinking these things?
atabo en aye gitokko iye dek me acamma 	a bowl is a bowl where sauce is put for eating
En owaco ni, ‘Doŋ alegi ba, wora, ore i ot pa abana, 	And besides all this, between us and you a great chasm has been set in place, so that those who want to go from here to you cannot, nor can anyone cross over from there to us.’
Ento kit ma atir ma ginoŋo pi niye loko kit man ni, “Pe ilok kekeni ni, ‘Aŋa ma biito malo i polo?’ (ni, me kelo Kricito piny), 	Moses writes this about the righteousness that is by the law: “The person who does these things will live by them.”
nyuttiwa adaa me lokke	show us the truth about the case
Ka doŋ oloko lok man botgi, ci odoŋ i Galilaya. 	I am not going up to this festival, because my time has not yet fully come.”
Ariŋo acito anyim atir kun akemo tol, wek anoŋ mot, ma en aye lwoŋo ma Lubaŋa tye ka lwoŋowa kwede malo i Kricito Yecu. 	But one thing I do: Forgetting what is behind and straining toward what is ahead, 
en tye ka yweyo nia ki tic matek ma obeddo ka tiyone 	he is resting from the hard work that he has been doing 
iyee miyo lim 	you have agreed to give the money 
pi meno wubed ryek calo twol dok wubed laboŋo bal mo i komwu calo akuri. 	Therefore be as shrewd as snakes and as innocent as doves.
twoone mono kom dano twatwal 	the illness causes much debilitation and wasting of body
rwotgi ma gimaro aye igi. Gibwolo tam pa dano ma gipe ki tam marac, ma kun noŋo giloko lok maber ma winyone mit adada. 	For such people are not serving our Lord Christ, but their own appetites
ka rommo maber en aye Mbale ka in iaa ki Gulu an aa ki Kampala pien tye i dyerre 	a good meeting place is Mbale if you are coming from Gulu and I am from Kampala becase it is midway
Ka Yecu oo, onono ni Lajaro doŋ ori i lyel nino aŋwen. 	Then Thomas (also known as Didymus) said to the rest of the disciples, “Let us also go, that we may die with him.”
odilo dong otoo woko 	the football has deflated has shrunk in size
Atye ki gen matek i komi ni ibiworo doga, oweko atye ka coyo boti lok man kun aŋeyo ni ibitimo makato ma awacci-ni. 	I do wish, brother, that I may have some benefit from you in the Lord; refresh my heart in Christ.
En odok iye botgi ni, “Wun pe wukwano gin ma Daudi otiyo ka en tye ma kec oneko marac, en ki jo ma tye kacel kwede? 	He answered, “Have you never read what David did when he and his companions were hungry and in need?
ci guporo lok kacel me mako Yecu ki ryeko ka doŋ gineke. 	and they schemed to arrest Jesus secretly and kill him.
en lapiya mada 	he is a great instigater
Tomaci (ma te lokke ni, Baŋi) owaco bot lupwonnye luwote ni, “Wan bene wacitu, wek watoyu kacel kwede.” 	Jesus had been speaking of his death, but his disciples thought he meant natural sleep.
kikopo man me cilba twerro jwaanne maleng ma ryeny  	this silver cup can be highly polished and shining
otwonno latin otte maber mada i gut kulu  	he built a very beautiful small house at the bay
yamo oranno kot woko 	the wind prevented the rain from falling
wod pa Yakobo, wod pa Icaka, wod pa Abraim, wod pa Tera, wod pa Nakor, 	the son of Jacob, the son of Isaac, the son of Abraham, the son of Terah, the son of Nahor,
ka iming callo ojuu ci dong imig adada 	if you are as foolish as fruit flies, then you are really foolish
ginekko ojee ki yat ma gionynyo i bur me ot meggi ma gugerro 	these small termites are killed by pouring poison into the holes which they have made 
geng kor labwor en aye mime tek me ywayo lee madonggo ma en onekko 	the strongly built chest of the lion makes it able to drag the big animal that it has killed
Ŋat ma ŋeyo gin ma atir ma myero etim, ce pe otimo, noŋo doŋ otimo bal.	If anyone, then, knows the good they ought to do and doesn’t do it, it is sin for them.
an alwor me citto atata i gang pa ludito 	I am afraid of going about to the big people's home
Jo ma yam guwoto kwede gucuŋ laliŋ, ma kun giwinyo dwan ento pe gineno ŋat mo. 	The men traveling with Saul stood there speechless; they heard the sound but did not see anyone.
gecco ngaa i lokke ni? 	to whom is he alluding to in his speech
omiyo pe akeŋ pwoyo Lubaŋa piwu, kun alwoŋo nyiŋwu bene i legana. 	For this reason, ever since I heard about your faith in the Lord Jesus and your love for all God’s people,
Ci dako mo ma onoŋo yam otwoyo two agobi pi mwaka apar wiye aryo obino ki tuŋ i ŋe Yecu ogudo dog boŋone, 	Jesus got up and went with him, and so did his disciples.
wan waneno deyone, deyo macalo pa latin acel keken ma oa bot Won. 	The Word became flesh and made his dwelling among us
I kare ma Festo obino i lobo ma gimiye ni en olo, i ŋe nino adek, oa i Cecaria, ocito i Jerucalem. `	Three days after arriving in the province, Festus went up from Caesarea to Jerusalem,
piny tye ka yutto 	it is becoming dark
Ento cik pe ocuŋ i kom niye, pien gicoyo ni, “Ŋat ma tiyo kun lubo gin ma cik mito bikwo pire.” 	So those who rely on faith are blessed along with Abraham, the man of faith.
kin oddine dig mada, wottu aget aget ci wukatto 	the spaces between the houses are very narrow, go side ways and you will pass
tye ka liggo kom agulu ma ocweyo maber mada 	he is polishing very well the pots which he made 
bur tye i par tyen latin 	ulcer is on the back of the child's foot 
ting latin wek wucit kwedde woko ka tukko	carry the child and go with her out to play
Lubaŋa Wonwa ki Rwotwa Yecu Kricito omiwu kica ki kuc. 	also to Apphia our sister and Archippus our fellow soldier—and to the church that meets in your home:
gwee dongge ka gwee kongo pe iye 	smell his mouth if there is no smell of alcohol
I kare ma Yecu obedo i ot i dog cam, lujog-mucoro mapol ki lubalo gubino gubedo kacel ki Yecu ki lupwonnyene. 	When the crowd saw this, they were filled with awe; and they praised God, who had given such authority to man.
tem kwan matek 	try to read hard 
ticce ongayo woko 	the work is above his ability 
nen in nene myero pe itim kimeno	look, you should not have done that way
Koŋ doŋ wunen kit nukuta madoŋo ma atye ka coyone ki ciŋa-ni. 	Therefore, as we have opportunity, let us do good to all people, especially to those who belong to the family of believers.
Pe wawor jogi macalo jo mogo i kingi, kit macalo yam gicoyo ni, “Lwak gubedo piny gucamo ka gumato, ci gua malo ka myel.” 	Do not be idolaters, as some of them were; as it is written: “The people sat down to eat and drink and got up to indulge in revelry.”
litino ma i kilaci twerro gwelle pien wang dirica cukulle lac 	the children in the classes can be beckoned because the windows are very large
nguna meeri ni ceng mo biteerri i pekko 	your lies will one day land you into trouble
cukari man twerro pokke ma rommo dano maber 	this sugar can be divided equally and will be enough for everybody
Ka wamaro Lubaŋa, ma walubo cikke bene, meno miyo waŋeyo ni wamaro litino pa Lubaŋa. 	This is how we know that we love the children of God: by loving God and carrying out his commands.
Ento ka pe giromo jukke kengi, myero gunyom, pien nyom ber kato ma laco nyo dako obedo ka ciro miti me kom. 	But if they cannot control themselves, they should marry, for it is better to marry than to burn with passion.
Ka dok ŋat ma nene ogamo ciliŋ alip acel-li bene obino anyim, 	“Then the man who had received one bag of gold came
En biloko komwa marac-ci doko calo kome me deyo, kun tiyo ki tekone ma miye twer me kelo jami ducu i te locce.	And we eagerly await a Savior from there, the Lord Jesus Christ,
dong ma kec mitto gin ma wac macalo lemun 	bad taste in the mouth requires sour tasting thing like lemon to produce good taste, that is, good appetite
dano ma otii 	an old man of about 75+ years 
ogoyo wiye ki odoo matek mada ci otyerro olar wiye woke 	he struck very hard his head with a stick and broke the skull
pe ber me gkido dano madit 	it is not good to tickle an adult
ka oballo gin mo ci gitwerro pwodde 	if he has spoilt anything, he can be beaten
Onoŋo wucito kunnu kono ka neno gin aŋo? Wucito ka neno dano ma oruko boŋŋi mabeco? Nen, jo ma ruko boŋŋi me deyo, dok ma bedo ki jami me wel, gibedo i gaŋ kal pa luker. 	If not, what did you go out to see? A man dressed in fine clothes? No, those who wear expensive clothes and indulge in luxury are in palaces.
Dano ma tamo kekene ni eŋeyo gin mo, noŋo pe ŋeyo gin mo kit ma onoŋo myero eŋe kwede. 	Those who think they know something do not yet know as they ought to know.
twol lak alakka ka wotto  	the snake crawls when going about
odonggo ni gaba 	he grew tall with long legs
ber mada me gerro ot 	it is very good to build a house
dano tye ka ywekke me citto ka ngollo wii rwotgi 	the people are gathering to go to welcome their chief 
rue pe twerro conynye pien obeddo purupuru 	rice cannot be dented because it is loose, not homogeneous 
ladong cen mato pii marac	who comes last drinks muddy water
Ento wun pe wutye i piny macol, utmegiwa, ma twero miyo nino-nu turuwu atura calo lakwo. 	But you, brothers and sisters, are not in darkness so that this day should surprise you like a thief.
Kit meno, wun bene myero cwinywu obed yom, wek wuribbe kweda i yomcwiny. 	But even if I am being poured out like a drink offering on the sacrifice and service coming from your faith, I am glad and rejoice with all of you.
latin ma ladwerre pkkione tek mada 	it is very difficult to look after an irritable or peevish child
jo mukene lakucu knew dok pe peg rummo wiigi 	some people the small gnats do not swarm round their heads
Tye lok man keken, i kare ma acuŋ i kingi adaŋŋe ni, ‘Pi lok kom cer pa jo muto aye omiyo wutye ka ŋolo lok i koma tin.’ ” 	unless it was this one thing I shouted as I stood in their presence: ‘It is concerning the resurrection of the dead that I am on trial before you today.’”
abil dekke ka mit? 	may I taste the food to find out if it is nice? 
Pi meno, ka Wod ogonyowu gibigonyowu atika. 	Now a slave has no permanent place in the family, but a son belongs to it forever.
Pien ki tuŋ bota, bedo kwo en aye Kricito, ki to kono miyo anoŋo magoba. 	I eagerly expect and hope that I will in no way be ashamed, but will have sufficient courage so that now as always Christ will be exalted in my body, whether by life or by death.
wan dong watye cok ka oo gang 	we are about to reach home 
Yam gicoyo ni, “Wor woru ki meni.” Man aye cik mukwoŋo ma giciko pi gin mo maber ma bia ki iye, ni, 	Children, obey your parents in the Lord, for this is right.
ludito i kare me lyel gimaarro ringo amal mada 	the elders in time of funeral, like very much to eat fried meat 
I kare ma Yecu doŋ otyeko loko lok magi, oa woko ki i Galilaya, ci obino i dul lobo me Judaya ma tye loka Jordan. 	When Jesus had finished saying these things, he left Galilee and went into the region of Judea to the other side of the Jordan.
Paulo olwoŋo ladit mony acel lalo dano miya, owacce ni, “Ter awobi man bot kapten. En tye ki lok mo ma mito tito bote.” 	Then Paul called one of the centurions and said, “Take this young man to the commander; he has something to tell him.”
Lupwonnye gucito gutiyo kit macalo Yecu ocikogi kwede, ci guyubo cam me Kato kunnu. 	So the disciples did as Jesus had directed them and prepared the Passover.
Dok ni, “Abiketo genna i kome,” ki dok ni, “An a ene, ki litino ma Lubaŋa doŋ omiya.” 	And again, “I will put my trust in him.” And again he says, “Here am I, and the children God has given me.”
jwerro pii ma omol i dye ot 	sweeping water which has flowed into the house with a broom
ngob me tyen pe gin maber wacel 	being lame is not a good thing at all
litino gitye ka makko gwen aribu 	the children are catching the aribu white ants
Onoŋo tye jo makato pyeraŋwen ma gukwoŋo kwoŋ kit meno. 	More than forty men were involved in this plot.
Cutcut dog Jekaria oyabbe, te lebe ogonnye, ci oloko kun pako Lubaŋa. 	Immediately his mouth was opened and his tongue set free, and he began to speak, praising God.
Man doŋ tyen lokke ni, jo muto i Kricito noŋo doŋ gurwenyo woko matwal. 	Then those also who have fallen asleep in Christ are lost.
Ento pe tye ŋatti mo ma twero donyo i ot pa dano ma kome tek ka yako jamine	In fact, no one can enter a strong man’s house without first tying him up
cog dano mapol maarro gwenynye mada ka gweyo odilo 	many people's knees tend to be dislocated during playing of football
tamme pud dong tek 	his idea is difficult
dano laworo gumyello otole matek ma mit mada mekwerro nino me nywalle 	yesterday the people danced very much and very well the war dance at the celebration of his birthday 
Doŋ kit macalo yam gicoyo, “Ŋat ma nyatte myero onyatte pi Rwot.”	Therefore, as it is written: “Let the one who boasts boast in the Lord.”
Ka otyeko tito botgi lok ducu, ci oncwalogi i Jopa. 	He told them everything that had happened and sent them to Joppa.
Ento Yecu odokke iye ni, “Wek koŋ doŋ obed kumeno kombeddi, pien porre botwa me cobo gin ducu ma tye atir.” Ci Jon oye lokke. 	But John tried to deter him, saying, “I need to be baptized by you, and do you come to me?”
gitiyo ki pipa makatto me tinggo moo macallo me petero ki me moo tara ki mukene 	a barrel is used very much for carrying petrol and paraffin among others
komme gum mada motoka omitto yokkone woko  	he is very lucky the motor car nearly knocked him
yiire tika tye? 	is there bewitching? 
“I kare meno ka ce dano mo owacciwu ni, ‘Nen, Kricito ma Lubaŋa oyero tye kany’, nyo ni, ‘Nen en tye kuca’, pe wuye. 	At that time if anyone says to you, ‘Look, here is the Messiah!’ or, ‘Look, there he is!’ do not believe it.
joo ma gujemmo gubinno ni nyanya nyanynya ci gutore woko i boma ni nyany 	the strikers came in large numbers and assembled in the town
kweri kweri man purre tye kwene 	where is the handle for this hoe?
moko me teddo mugati  	flour for baking bread
ka obinno i Kampala ci tirro kwene? 	when he comes to Kampala where does he go (to stay)? 
peya gingeyo guramma me lok Kingereja  	they do not yet know English grammar
Kono ka bal mo obedo pe i gicikke mukwoŋo, kono onoŋo gicikke mo me aryo doŋ pe mitte. 	For if there had been nothing wrong with that first covenant, no place would have been sought for another.
lalur en aye lee acel ma cammo lakit ringo pa lee ducu ma kadi dong otop 	a hyena is one of the predators that eat dead animals meat even if it is rotten
dano matye ki mwolo nino ducu pe noggo pekko kama ciao iye 	a gentle person always finds no difficulty wherever he goes
opotto ci ogallo gut cingge 	he fell and dislocated his wrist
ceer dongga omiyo alokko lok marac 	the day Jesus rose from the dead
cak ngoo woko ka pe iketto i kabad me gico 	what has he eaten? 
winyi gerro odigi i jang yaddi 	the birds build their nests on the branches of trees 
ladit pa latic meno bidwogo i nino ma en pe tamo pi dwogone, dok i cawa ma en pe ŋeyo	The master of that servant will come on a day when he does not expect him and at an hour he is not aware of
latin olwokko komme obeddo abac abac	the child has partially washed his body but some parts are still dirty 
I kare ma Luparicayo guwinyo ni Yecu otwoyo dog Lucadukayo woko ki lok, ci gucokke kacel. 	When the crowds heard this, they were astonished at his teaching.
dekke gweye maber ki kwon 	the sauce can be scooped 
wabicakko reggo diki 	we shall start grinding tomorrow
Ento Yecu oŋeyo tamgi woko, owaco bot labade otal ni, “Bin icuŋ kany.” Oa, ocuŋ kunnu. 	But Jesus knew what they were thinking and said to the man with the shriveled hand, “Get up and stand in front of everyone.” So he got up and stood there.
Cakke i nino meno guribo lok me neke. 	and not only for that nation but also for the scattered children of God, to bring them together and make them one.
Yam apitowu ki cak, pien onoŋo peya wutwero camo cam matek	I gave you milk, not solid food, for you were not yet ready for it
Ci aneno gaŋ maleŋ, Jerucalem manyen, kun oa ki i polo bot Lubaŋa bino piny, ma giyubo woko macalo nyako ger ma gideyo pi cware. 	I saw the Holy City, the new Jerusalem, coming down out of heaven from God, prepared as a bride beautifully dressed for her husband.
Ento ka Cwiny Maleŋ aye ma tye ka telowu, ci doŋ pe wubedo i te cik. 	So I say, walk by the Spirit, and you will not gratify the desires of the flesh.
Ki tuŋ bota pe onoŋo aparo pi jo ma giŋene ni gin ludito, pien Lubaŋa gire pe leŋŋe tuŋ bot ŋat mo pi kit ma en tye kwede. Gin jo ma ŋenenu pe gumedda gin mo. 	We did not give in to them for a moment, so that the truth of the gospel might be preserved for you.
Ento koŋ amito apeny ni, “Onoŋo yam pe guwinyo?” Guwinyo, kit macalo yam gicoyo i Jabuli ni, “Dwangi winnye teretere i wi lobo ducu, ki lok ma giloko oo wa i agikki piny.” 	Consequently, faith comes from hearing the message, and the message is heard through the word about Christ.
kic ma odong olo rommo jwanne ki kwon me acamma 	the remaining honey is enough for eating by wiping with kwon
latini doki lak twatwal i kin duka	this child wanders aimlessly among the shops 
man en eye jami mogo ma lalakko dong bilanynyogi ata mape dong bigwokko maber 	these are the things that an heir will not look after well but will throw them about
Kit meno, yat maber nyako nyige mabeco, ento yat marac nyako nyige maraco. 	But small is the gate and narrow the road that leads to life, and only a few find it.
Ento ka oniaŋ pire kene, ci owaco ni, ‘Lutic pa wora tye adi ma gicamo kwon loyogi, ento an kono ato kec kany! 	“When he came to his senses, he said, ‘How many of my father’s hired servants have food to spare, and here I am starving to death!
i cukul gikutto olwet odiko me coyo litino kwan 	in the school, the bugle is sounded or blown to wake up the pupils
oro man tin wangni obeddo lyet twatwal omiyo jami ducu magipitto otwoo woko liweng 	this dry season has been very hot and made all the crops planted to dry up
dano myerro pe gubed ki adkia dkia pi gin mo matkii mo pien eno ballo kin dano nyo lok adkia dkia i kin dano pe ber	people should not insist over a small thing because that brings trouble among the people or persistence in something among the people is not good
acitto kunno ci pe anenno gin mo 	I went there but I saw nothing 
Pien bedo ma giliri ki bedo ma pe giliri pe konyo gin mo	Circumcision is nothing and uncircumcision is nothing
akwotta emme tye ka medde amedda 	the swelling in his thigh is getting big and bigger
lukwoo gupurre gumakko lacoomo ci guyakko jami woko liweng ki i komme 	the thieves jumped upon a person suddenly and robbed him of everything
laa dogge ngwee	his spittle smells 
ka kuman onoŋo myero wua woko ki i lobo. 	In that case you would have to leave this world.
tunynyo bye man woko 	breaking and scattering the earth of the anthill
Ka otimo bal i komi tyen abiro i nino acel, ce olokke boti tyen abiro, kun legi ni, ‘Aŋut,’ time kica.” 	Even if they sin against you seven times in a day and seven times come back to you saying ‘I repent,’ you must forgive them.”
wang burre twerro jabbe ki pii ma de de 	the wound can be swabbed with lukewarm water
twoone onyobbo komme woke 	the disease has weaken his body 
Cakke kombeddi pe amito ŋat mo oyela, pien atye ki poyo ma doŋ giketo i koma ma nyuto ni an opii pa Yecu. 	Peace and mercy to all who follow this rule—to the Israel of God.
oyuto latin gweno ni wiu 	the eagle took away the young chick at lightning speed 
Piŋo? Pien ni pe amarowu? Lubaŋa ŋeyo ni amarowu. 	As surely as the truth of Christ is in me, nobody in the regions of Achaia will stop this boasting of mine.
gin ma otimmo meno mere gin acaya ma gatti pe myerro otam lye gin mo	what he did should be ignored or despised and nobody should think about it at all
Baibul en aye buk maleng pa Lukricitayo matye iye dal aryo, Cik Macon ka Cik Manyen 	Bible is the holy book of the Christians, which consists of the Old Testament and the New Testament
wangge twero pedde malac 	his eyes can be opened widely 
moonne i kin jooni ocakke wa con, hatred  	enmity between them started long time ago 
rya rya wang 	being lascivious
Ka Yecu doŋ omato koŋo vino mawac, owaco ni, “Doŋ otum.” Okulo wiye, omiyo cwinye. 	and to the disciple, “Here is your mother.” From that time on, this disciple took her into his home.
Pi mitta kekena, kono yam giceno an kikoma woko, wek gikwanya woko ki bot Kricito, pi utmegina, ma gin wadina me rokka. 	I have great sorrow and unceasing anguish in my heart.
Kit macalo can madit ma Kricito yam ociro doŋ opoto i komwa bene, kit meno bene pi Kricito wan bene gikweyo cwinywa twatwal. 	who comforts us in all our troubles, so that we can comfort those in any trouble with the comfort we ourselves receive from God.
kel libira me kwoyo bongo 	bring the needle for sewing the clothes
pi giggi ne omiyo dano pe gimitto tic me gerro odde 	people do not want to come to build his house because of his peevishness  
ryek mada ka i lok me pkio, miyo kare ducu loyo lok 	he is very clever and intelligent in the matter of the court cases, that is why every time in court cases he is always acquitted
pe tye ngat mo ma twerro beddo labongo larem ka wiye tye maber 	nobody can be without a friend if he is of sound mind 
kell opal me tokko kwon 	bring the oyster shell for dishing the kwon
larro litino oyot oyot ki cam, kec tye ka nekkongi mada 	save the children quickly from hunger with food, because they are very hungry
Ka lacen dok onyutte onen bot jone apar wiye acel ma onoŋo gitye i dog cam. Ocako da i komgi pi kwero ye lok, ki pi tekcwinygi, pien gukwero ye lok pa jo ma doŋ guneno kome i kare ma ocer-ri. 	Later Jesus appeared to the Eleven as they were eating; he rebuked them for their lack of faith and their stubborn refusal to believe those who had seen him after he had risen.
Wutem pwonyo gin ma yomo cwiny Rwot. 	(for the fruit of the light consists in all goodness, righteousness and truth)
geerro i kom lutic ryemmo lutic woko aryamma ki botti 	cruelty to the workers chases them away from you
Ka jo aryo-nu mito a woko ki bote, ci Petero owaco ni, “Ladit, bedo kany ber	As the men were leaving Jesus, Peter said to him, “Master, it is good for us to be here
Dano ducu ma guwinyo gumako i cwinygi, kun giwaco ni, “Latin man kite bibedo niŋniŋ?” Pien ciŋ Rwot tye kwede. 	Everyone who heard this wondered about it, asking, “What then is this child going to be?” For the Lord’s hand was with him.
Onoŋo tye i nyime dano mo ma twoyo two akwota kom. 	There in front of him was a man suffering from abnormal swelling of his body.
awobine dok perro lok twatwal ka tye i kilaci miyo pe niang gin ma gipwonynyo 	the boy talks too much when he is in class, that is why he does not understand what is being taught 
Kica pa Rwotwa Yecu Kricito obed kwedwu ducu.	The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all.
Kodi mukene okir i ŋom maber, ci gunyako nyiggi, mogo miya acel, mukene pyerabicel, ki mogo pyeradek. 	Still other seed fell on good soil, where it produced a crop—a hundred, sixty or thirty times what was sown.
Itito ni, “Pe itim abor”, in kono itimo abor? Cwinyi dag woro jogi, ento ikwalo gin ma tye i ot jok? 	you, then, who teach others, do you not teach yourself? You who preach against stealing, do you steal?
gitye ka tonno yat i wang ge 	the medicine is being dropped into his eyes
wan ducu waballo 	we all do sin or commit sin
bitto rec ki otwol kot ma girwakko i wii goli 	to bait the fish with an earth 'worm fixed on a hook
in dano madit pe myero dong ibed i ot macalo man 	you are now an important person , you should not live in a house like this 
Utmegina, ka ce dano mo ki i kinwu oŋak woko ki i lok ada, ka ŋat mukene aye doŋ odwoke cen, 	My brothers and sisters, if one of you should wander from the truth and someone should bring that person back,
litino gitye ka yurre i kom bao me tukko meeggi  	the children are gliding down on the board made for them for play
okello dek ma kamlara dong kec iye mape wacce ento man dong ma ikelloni gitworra tworra 	he brought the food which was very hot with pepper but this one which you brought is slightly better much better, that is, it is less hot than the one she brought 
Acwale me bino kacel ki ominwa mukene ma wamaro, en aye Onesimo	I am sending him to you for the express purpose that you may know about our circumstances and that he may encourage your hearts.
Pe yam agamo lok man me kwena maber ki bot dano mo, dok bene pe gipwonya kwede apwonya, ento anoŋo ki bot Yecu Kricito ma ceŋ onyutte bota-ni. 	I want you to know, brothers and sisters, that the gospel I preached is not of human origin.
Ka Yecu obino i ot pa laloc, oneno lukut nyamulere, kun lwak tye ka koko, 	“Take heart, daughter,” he said, “your faith has healed you.” And the woman was healed at that moment.
Macalo yam en oloko ni, “Odoŋ kare manok mo, ci ŋat ma bino ca bibino woko oyotoyot ma pe bigalle. 	For, “In just a little while, he who is coming will come and will not delay.”
ngollo kop pa Onen We tin 	the judgment of Onen's case is today 
Pien waŋeyo ni ka komwa me lobo man oballe woko, ma wabedo iye macalo wabedo i kema-ni wan watye ki gedo mukene ma Lubaŋa bimiyo botwa, ot ma pe gigero ki ciŋ, ot ma tye doŋ bedo matwal i polo. 	to the only God our Savior be glory, majesty, power and authority, through Jesus Christ our Lord, before all ages, now and forevermore! Amen.
kono nene pe rid lokke matek kono pe ononggo 	if he did not insist on his case he would not have got it
en mitto cunna bwollo keken 	he wants only flirtation 
Wunenne kenwu wek gin ma doŋ wutyeko tic pire pe orweny woko ki botwu, wek wunoŋ mucarawu ducu. 	Any such person is the deceiver and the antichrist.
wangge col 	he is unfriendly and has cold look 
teer kom i ot 	take the chair into the house 
cweer yer woko i kom laa man 	scrape off hair from this hide
pud peya onyommo 	he has not yet married or he is not yet married 
cony latin ot mo piri 	build a small house for yourself
Ka oloko lok man, oŋulo laa piny, orubo ki ŋom, ci owiro ki waŋ laco-nu. 	While I am in the world, I am the light of the world.”
oyoo guny woko i otte 	the rat disappears into its hole
remmo lok me mung i nyim kacokke	blurting out a very important secret to the assembly
collo mucoro en aye ngat acel i kom yoo madit ma gabumente nonggo tye lim madit me tic kwede 	to pay taxes is one of the important ways in which the government gets funds for running its business
tung pii omol woko 	open the water to flow out 
gityee i teer dero ka matte matek mada ki kongo 	they are under the barns drinking too much alcohol 
mon ma yang con girukko lagal mada i gutgi 	in the past the women used to wear the white metal necklace
Ka piny oyuto, yeya onoŋo doŋ tye wa i dye nam, en kene aye onoŋo tye i wi tura. 	Later that night, the boat was in the middle of the lake, and he was alone on land.
lim madowong aa i pur 	wealth comes from farming
Ka oneno ŋat acel i kingi gitimo marac, ci okonyo dano ma gibwoyo-ni, ka oculo kwor ogoyo Laejipt. 	He saw one of them being mistreated by an Egyptian, so he went to his defense and avenged him by killing the Egyptian.
Yecu owaco ni, “Lanebi giketo deyo i kome, ento pe giketo deyo i kome ki i lobo tugi ki i kin jo tugi, ki i ode.” 	Jesus said to them, “A prophet is not without honor except in his own town, among his relatives and in his own home.”
i kare man kotte mere tikko ngitto keken pe cweer 	these days it does not rain but only drizzles 
aa nen inekko agulu woko!	look you have broken the pot
Dok owaco bene i jabuli mukene ni, ‘Pe ibiweko kom danoni ma geni top woko.’ 	So it is also stated elsewhere: “‘You will not let your holy one see decay.’
Apenyo ni, “Lubaŋa mono doŋ okwero jone woko?” Pe kumeno gire. An kikoma bene an Laicrael, lakwar Abraim, ma i kaka pa Benjamin. 	The one who is not circumcised physically and yet obeys the law will condemn you who, even though you have the written code and circumcision, are a lawbreaker.
ci gucokke gubino bote ma onoŋo gimer ki Blacito, ladit ma loyo ot pa kabaka. Gupenyo ni gimito kuc, pien lobogi limo cam ma a ki i lobo pa kabaka. 	After securing the support of Blastus, a trusted personal servant of the king, they asked for peace, because they depended on the king’s country for their food supply.
yamo dong opyee 	the wind has calm down
Pe tye gin mo ma dok miya abedo ki yomcwiny madit makato me winyo ni litinona gitye ka lubo lok ada. 	It gave me great joy when some believers came and testified about your faithfulness to the truth, telling how you continue to walk in it.
bki bongone ki pii kadong ingoo pac 	wet the clothes in water and then iron them
Ka owaco bot jo mucokke ni, “Jo Icrael, ber wugwokke i gin ma wutimo i kom jo man. 	Then he addressed the Sanhedrin: “Men of Israel, consider carefully what you intend to do to these men.
karre mogo cwinynye kide ni myerro elweny  	sometimes he feels excited that he should fight
gitiyo ki cementi me gerro oddi, ka giketto i kin matapwali ci miyo gimokko gimakke matek 	cement is used for building houses,when it is put between two bricks, it makes the bricks stick together very firmly
leg wii odok tung lacam	turn your head to the left
aborane giturro mabecco mada	the water lily blooms very beautifully
winy lok ma gilokki 	listen to what you have been told 
ka path mo obeddo ka nenne twatwal ci jwiyo woko cut 	if someone stares at her, she hisses at him at once
Ka gulego ni koŋ obed kunnu kare malac, ci okwero woko. 	When they asked him to spend more time with them, he declined.
Pe wubed ki par i kom gin mo, ento i lok ducu wumi Lubaŋa oŋe gin ma wumito i lega ki i bako dogwu kacel ki miyo pwoc bene. 	Yes, and I ask you, my true companion, help these women since they have contended at my side in the cause of the gospel, along with Clement and the rest of my co-workers, whose names are in the book of life.
Ento lok kom Kricito yam pe gipwonyowu kit meno,	Having lost all sensitivity, they have given themselves over to sensuality so as to indulge in every kind of impurity, and they are full of greed.
pii o oo woko, kel mukene 	the water has been poured bring more 
jakko lok ajakka ki dano pe ber 	arrogant speech to the people is not good 
latin man onenno can ma kare pe ka wet ki tyene nia wa Kitgum ni oo wa kany 	the child suffered walking on foot from Kitgum up to here
litino gitye ka cubbu lawala i bar odilo 	the children are spearing the circle in the football field 
0Pe waŋur, macalo jo mogo i kingi yam guŋur kwede, ci omiyo Lanek oŋinyogi woko. 	And do not grumble, as some of them did—and were killed by the destroying angel.
twone twillo kom latin atwilla 	the illness is making the child thin and thin 
gucitto ka tweyo yen 	they went to gather the firewood 
itmmo ngoo kaa? 	excuse me what are you doing? or what have you done? 
tokke ki ngwec 	sudden starting to run
ma jo mogo i kingi wun wubinekogi ci wugurogi woko i kom yatariya, ki jo mogo wubigoyogi ki del i kacokkewu, kun wuyelo ki gaŋ ki gaŋ	Therefore I am sending you prophets and sages and teachers
in bene kong ibil gin ma luremmi gubillo 	you also should taste what your friends tasted, that is, you also should suffer as your friends did
gitye ka wotto i lobo mapol 	they are travelling to many countries
mon Indi aye gimaarro mada rukko luyolo i gutgi 	the Indian women love very much wearing necklaces of bright beads of various kinds
otoyo odilo woko 	he deflated the ball
Yecu yam ocwalo legane bot Lubaŋa, i kare me kwone i lobo man, en aye bot ŋat ma yam twero lare ki i to, kun bako doge ma pe twerre ki koko ki pig waŋe, ci Lubaŋa bene owinye pi mwolone bote.	During the days of Jesus’ life on earth, he offered up prayers and petitions with fervent cries and tears to the one who could save him from death, and he was heard because of his reverent submission.
ket tal ari i yoo wek ogeg dano katto kany 	put the long pole across the road to prevent from people passing here
gwokke mada ka iporro lok kwedde pien danone ajut mada	be careful when discussing any matter with him because he is peculiar person or has 
dano ma lapoti piir nino ducu potto I pekko pien noggo pe lleyo gin ma etiyo 	an imitator always gets into trouble because he does not know what to do
ajwaka latyet ki war	one who consults spirits by throwing of the leather sandals 
gucitto ka yuttu or yutto rec 	they went to fish with hooks
gicayo lok ma gikwiya. Gibinekogi woko calo lee, 	They are like unreasoning animals, creatures of instinct, born only to be caught and destroyed, and like animals they too will perish.
Ento Solomon aye ogero ot pire. 	But it was Solomon who built a house for him.
ngaa matye ka yubbo cam? 	who is preparing the food? 
lyerro awal i kor ot 	suspending the calabash on the wall
gwok mwollo yibbe 	the dog presses its tail between its thighs
rwodi girukko jor ka gicitto kacokke madit 	chiefs put on their robes when going to very important meetings
pyer pino owkide woko 	the wasp's waist is very small
rette myero pe gilwonggi tukko pien enno mere lweny kikome 	wrestling should not be regarded as a game because it is an actual fighting
kwany mungati en wek icibag 	take this bread and go and eat it
ka oo, gutere i kicika ma malo. Mon-to ducu gucuŋ kun gikok ka ŋete, ma ginyuto koti ki boŋŋi mukene ma Dorka okwoyo ma onoŋo pud tye botgi. 	All the widows stood around him, crying and showing him the robes and other clothing that Dorcas had made while she was still with them.
bin i tel wiwa 	come and lead us or guide us 
wooru twoo mada i ot yat 	your father is very ill in the hospital
Dok bene en omiyo giketo poyo i kom dano ducu, jo matino ki jo madito, lulonyo ki lucan, jo ma gilone kengi wa ki opii bene, i ciŋgi tuŋ lacuc nyo i tur nyimgi. 	It also forced all people, great and small, rich and poor, free and slave, to receive a mark on their right hands or on their foreheads,
Ka kare me ticce otum, ci odok i pacone. 	When his time of service was completed, he returned home.
Yecu odokkigi iye ni, “Adada awacciwu ni, wutye ka yenya pe ni pien yam wuneno lanyut, ento ni pien wucamo kwon, wuyeŋ. 	When they found him on the other side of the lake, they asked him, “Rabbi, when did you get here?”
Ka acwalogi ni gudok wa tugi ki kec, ci kec bibwoyogi woko i yo, pien jo mukene i kingi gua ki ka mabor.” 	If I send them home hungry, they will collapse on the way, because some of them have come a long distance.”
gud bongone ki cinggi ka wek iniang berre	touch the garment with your fingers in order to appreciate it's quality
Dok awinyo dwan mukene ma oa ki ipolo kun wacci, “Wun jona, wua woko ki bote, wek pe wuribbe kwede i balle, wek bene pe wunywak kwede gemo mogo ma poto i kome! 	Then I heard another voice from heaven say: “‘Come out of her, my people,’ so that you will not share in her sins, so that you will not receive any of her plagues;
twon ogele 	a fully grown big young bull 
Gulworo ni gwok nyo mel bicorre i kom got, ci gubolo lajuk mel aŋwen i pii ki tuŋ tere, ci gulego ni piny myero koŋ oru. 	Fearing that we would be dashed against the rocks, they dropped four anchors from the stern and prayed for daylight.
terru kaal wii pero ka twoo iye 	take the millet to the platform for drying
yik pa ladit bibeddo diki 	the burial of the big man will be tomorrow
Apwoyo Lubaŋa i kare ducu ma noŋo atye ka po piwu. 	Grace and peace to you from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
Yecu odok iye botgi ni, “An bene abipenyowu ki peny acel	He replied, “I will also ask you a question
Pien Cwiny Maleŋ bipwonyowu i cawa meno i gin ma myero wuwaci.” 	for the Holy Spirit will teach you at that time what you should say.”
guwotto nene wa Atiak	they walked as far as Atiak 
gucitto gang pa jango ka piddo 	they went to sub chief's home for a court case
wamitto nenno ladit Oto 	we want to see Mr Oto 
iye mere twerro godde maber 	his abdomen can be easily contracted or pulled in
par twatwal pi potto peny meeri pe konyo 	pondering too much for your failure in the examination is useless
cunne otello .	his penis is erected or his penis has become big, straight and rigid
bade tung cel aye otur 	one side of his arm that broke
latini doki lak twatwal i kin duka 	this child roams aimlessly among the shops 
latin ka gipwonyno maber ci pe layo dyewor	when a child is well trained, he does not wet his bed
dano man pe ber 	this man is not good 
man aye wang waat kama lee ducu mapol ma pat pat gimatto iye pii 	this is the place where animals of all kinds come to drink water from
ma pe ginywalogi ki remo, kadi pi miti me kom, kadi pi mit pa dano, ento pi miti pa Lubaŋa. 	He came to that which was his own, but his own did not receive him.
En Cwiny acel-lu miyo niye bot ŋat mukene, ki bot dano mukene en Cwiny acel-lu miyo mot me caŋo two i kom dano. 	to another faith by the same Spirit, to another gifts of healing by that one Spirit,
alanynyo gwokko gwenona	I neglected rearing my chicken
ka doŋ opwoyo, ci obaro iye, omiyogi kun wacci, “Man aye koma ma tye piwu. Wutim kuman me po pira.” 	and when he had given thanks, he broke it and said, “This is my body, which is for you; do this in remembrance of me.”
Ka dano ducu guneno, ci guŋur kun giwaco ni, “En odonyo i ot ka bedo welo pa dano ma labalo.” 	All the people saw this and began to mutter, “He has gone to be the guest of a sinner.”
Koŋ apenywu ki peny man keken: wun mono yam wulimo Cwiny Maleŋ pi lubo cik, kono nyo pi ye lok me kwena maber ma wuwinyo gitito botwu-ni? 	You foolish Galatians! Who has bewitched you? Before your very eyes Jesus Christ was clearly portrayed as crucified.
twii pa muranga yot mada 	germination of beans is easy
pwony litino man ki kit maber 	teach the children good manners 
dano ma lapoti pi nino ducu potto i pekko pien mitti etim gin ma nonggo pe ngeyo 	a copier or an imitator always falls into terrible problems because he wants to do things, which he does not know
wek etyek kare me kwone i lobo man ma pud odoŋ kun pe dok lubo miti maraco ma dano paro, ento cobo gin ma Lubaŋa mito. 	Therefore, since Christ suffered in his body, arm yourselves also with the same attitude, because whoever suffers in the body is done with sin.
otimmo maber atikatika 	he did it really very well
Gin guciro un ducu ma gitemogi kwede matek, ento gin mua ki i yomcwiny madit ma gin gubedo kwede i dye can madit mada ma yam odiyogi ca, en aye lonyo madit me cwiny ma gubedo kwede me miyo mot. 	And now, brothers and sisters, we want you to know about the grace that God has given the Macedonian churches.
Lok man doŋ otyeko nen woko ka maleŋ makato ka ajwaka mukene otuc macalo Melkijedek, 	And what we have said is even more clear if another priest like Melchizedek appears,
Oketa ogerro ot jantoo meere maber mada 	Oketa has built a beautiful rectangular house 
joone giraccu mada gujubbo nyim mogo kong adibu ka dong guo kellone	they are really very bad people, they corruptedly took some of the simsim before and then they brought it 
gikko citto ka kwang diki 	do not go to swim tomorrow
Pien pe dok gudiyo cwinygi me penye ki lok mo. 	And no one dared to ask him any more questions.
laromo ot cammo gin ma lak alalka ki ma tuk atukka 	gecko eats all crawling and flying insects 
Jo mukene giŋalogi, gipwodogi, gitweyogi ki nyor ci giketogi i mabuc. 	Some faced jeers and flogging, and even chains and imprisonment.
romo pe koko latin pa dyel	a sheep does not lament the death of a goat's kid
Yecu owacce ni, “Pe awacci ni ma romo tyen abiro, ento ma romo tyen pyerabiro tyen abiro. 	Jesus answered, “I tell you, not seven times, but seventy-seven times.
Otyeno me nino meno, ma en nino mukwoŋo me cabit, ma kun gicego doggola ka ma lupwonnye gucokke iye, pi lworo Lujudaya, Yecu obino, ocuŋ i dyegi, owaco ki gin ni, “Kuc obed botwu.” 	Jesus said to her, “Mary.” She turned toward him and cried out in Aramaic, “Rabboni!” (which means “Teacher”).
tye ka twoyo minne 	she is caring or looking after her sick mother 
Onoŋo pe giŋeyo kit ma Lubaŋa kwano kwede dano ni kite atir, ento gubedo ka yenyo ni gitwero noŋo kit ma atir pigi kengi, pe gumine kengi i kit ma atir ma Lubaŋa miyo. 	For I can testify about them that they are zealous for God, but their zeal is not based on knowledge.
Wupo mono i kom dako pa Lot. 	Remember Lot’s wife!
twiny ummi matek 	blow your nose very hard 
leggo ni Orac en aye ma okwallo kwoo kun en pe okwallo 	imputing or to say saying that Orac was the one who stole something and yet he did not
Gibineno can ma rom man! Pien gilubo kit pa Kain, giketo tek mada i tam mogo ma pe atir pi mito lim kit macalo yam Balaam otimo, dok bene gito woko pi pyem kit macalo yam Kora ojemo kwede, 	Yet these people slander whatever they do not understand, and the very things they do understand by instinct—as irrational animals do—will destroy them.
pe ibed ka wakke kany, nen gwinynye ma onweng 	don't be boasting here, look, at his flat buttocks
Acakki me lok me kwena maber i kom Yecu Kricito, Wod pa Lubaŋa, 	The beginning of the good news about Jesus the Messiah, the Son of God,
gweddo lok ki bot dano 	getting information from a man by coercion or luring him to give the information
wiye wirre ci potto piny 	he feels gidy and falls down
ka tin gipenyowa lok mudok i kom gin maber ma otimme i kom laput, ki kit ma dano man ocaŋ kwede, 	If we are being called to account today for an act of kindness shown to a man who was lame and are being asked how he was healed,
Yecu otero jone apar wiye aryo i muŋ, owaco botgi ni, “Wunen, waecito Jerucalem, lok ducu ma lunebi gucoyo i kom Wod pa dano bicobbe kakare. 	Jesus took the Twelve aside and told them, “We are going up to Jerusalem, and everything that is written by the prophets about the Son of Man will be fulfilled.
Ka gitye ka gonyo latin kana, wegine gupenyogi ni, “Wugonyo latin kana piŋo?” 	As they were untying the colt, its owners asked them, “Why are you untying the colt?”
Iyo, Wora, pien onoŋo kit meno ineno ber i waŋi, ipwoyo kit yo macalo meno. 	Yes, Father, for this is what you were pleased to do.
ci oŋilo got madit oloro ki dog lyel, ka doŋ oa ocito gire. 	and placed it in his own new tomb that he had cut out of the rock
dano mapol gubinno ka jukko cwinynye mada	many people came to comfort him very much
leny moo i kel 	melt the ghee or butter and bring 
dok ni yam onen bot Petero, ka dok onen bot jo apar wiye aryo ca. 	and that he appeared to Cephas, and then to the Twelve.
yugi ma i ngee otti twerro walle woke maber 	the rubbish behind the house can be well gathered away i the rubbish behind your house can be very well gathered away
lamin Onek ber mada ci ento kitte rac 	Onek's sister is very beautiful but has bad manners 
woro cal jogi, talo dano, mone, daa, nyeko, kiniga, laro dito, pyem, pokke, 	The acts of the flesh are obvious: sexual immorality, impurity and debauchery;
I kare ma doŋ gityeko batija Yecu, ci en okatti woko ki i pii oyotoyot	Jesus replied, “Let it be so now; it is proper for us to do this to fulfill all righteousness.” Then John consented.
Pe ni ŋat mo yam oneno Won, kono ŋat ma yam oa bot Lubaŋa, en aye oneno Won. 	It is written in the Prophets: ‘They will all be taught by God.’ Everyone who has heard the Father and learned from him comes to me.
kella lakologoc me tokko cam 	bring for me a spoon for dishing the food 
dano ma beddo ki lok me jerro dano twatwal i dongge noggo en bene kama oa iye pe gene maber 	a person who frequently talks about status of people, is usually a person whose tribal status is not known
dano tye ka corre madowong mada i bar odilo 	very many people are arriving in large numbers at the football field 
Me agikkine, wun ducu wubed ki tam acel dok ki cwiny acel. Wumarre calo omego, ma wutye ki kica dok ki cwiny mamwol. 	Husbands, in the same way be considerate as you live with your wives, and treat them with respect as the weaker partner and as heirs with you of the gracious gift of life, so that nothing will hinder your prayers.
laworo pe gitukko odilo pien ononggo dilo otoo woko 	yesterday football was not played because the ball was deflated
Meno doŋ pe an aye ma atiyo, ento bal ma bedo i iya aye ma tiyo gire. 	And if I do what I do not want to do, I agree that the law is good.
kella langii wek anen nyo angii i wiya 	bring me a minor so that I look at my head 
Cik pa Moses gire tye iye tipo keken me jami mabeco me kare me anyim, pe calgi kikome. Pi cik dano gibedo ka kelo gitum ma kitgi acel nakanaka, mwaka ki mwaka	The law is only a shadow of the good things that are coming—not the realities themselves
giketto cam i nyim Owot 	food has been placed before Owot 
Ka ibino, kella ki boŋo ma yam aweko i Teroa tuŋ pa Karpo. Kwokka bene bukka, makatone maca me del ca. 	I sent Tychicus to Ephesus.
bki del man ma otwoo ka dong inyog odok laa me rukka 	soak this dried hide and then rumple or scrumple to make it into a soft skin for dressing
okwik gupong ka cammo okodo i kom dyanggi 	the paradise flycatchers are overcrowded picking ticks from the cattle
Pien atito botwu ni, pe tye ŋatti mo i kin jo ma yam gilwoŋogi ma bibilo karamana.’ ” 	I tell you, not one of those who were invited will get a taste of my banquet.’”
Meno aye pidona bot jo ma giroka ki peny. 	This is my defense to those who sit in judgment on me.
ket latin i ngee mine 	place the child on the back of her mother
En aye wic, dul kom ducu guribbe woko i kome, dok gukubbe kacel i waŋ mwot ducu ma tye iye. Ka dul acel acel tye ka tiyo ticce kakare, miyo kom doŋo maber i mar.	Instead, speaking the truth in love, we will grow to become in every respect the mature body of him who is the head, that is, Christ.
wumito cela ki got pi tic mene?” 	but Jesus said to them, “I have shown you many good works from the Father
gupenynyo Okullo twatwal kace onogo ngeyo gin ma otimme 	they interrogated Okullo thoroughly if he knew what happened
Ka pe kumeno, ka ipwoyo Lubaŋa ki cwinyi keken, dano mukene ata ma obino i cokkewu twero gamo “Amen” i pwocci-nu i kite mene, ma kun pe oniaŋ i gin ma iloko? 	Otherwise when you are praising God in the Spirit, how can someone else, who is now put in the position of an inquirer, say “Amen” to your thanksgiving, since they do not know what you are saying?
Macalo Lida cok ki Jopa, ka lupwonnye guwinyo ni Petero tye kunnu, ci gucwalo dano aryo bote, gulege ni, “Tim ber, ibin oyot botwa, pe iru.” 	Lydda was near Joppa; so when the disciples heard that Peter was in Lydda, they sent two men to him and urged him, “Please come at once!”
gucitto ka yik 	they went for burial 
goyo oduro wuk wuk 	this is sounding alarm of danger from a fierce animal or enemy
Kit meno en timo kica bot ŋat ma en mito etimme kica, dok bene loko cwiny ŋat ma en mito doko nwaŋ. 	For Scripture says to Pharaoh: “I raised you up for this very purpose, that I might display my power in you and that my name might be proclaimed in all the earth.”
Yecu owaccigi ni, “Wuony pii i dak” Guonyo opoŋ woko libyeny. 	His mother said to the servants, “Do whatever he tells you.”
Jo mukene ma two gemo magi pe onekogi yam pe guŋut pi gin ma onoŋo gin kikomgi gutiyo ki ciŋgi, pe guweko woro jogi, ki cal jogi ma gutiyo ki jabu, ki ryal ki mola, ki kidi me wel-gu, ki yadi, ma gin cal jogi ma pe gitwero neno gin mo, dok pe gitwero winyo lok mo, kadi ki wot bene pe gitwero wot. 	The rest of mankind who were not killed by these plagues still did not repent of the work of their hands; they did not stop worshiping demons, and idols of gold, silver, bronze, stone and wood—idols that cannot see or hear or walk.
caa ne tika twerro yubbe? 	can the watch be repaired
lalworo  dok i meni	cowardly man go back into your mother's womb
“Man aye cikka, ni wumarre kekenwu macalo ceŋ amarowu. 	I have told you this so that my joy may be in you and that your joy may be complete.
kel mandara me nenno yer wic kit matye kwedde 	bring the looking glass to see how the hair on the head looks like 
En oneno dano mo i waŋ lek ma nyiŋe Anania ka donyo bote kun keto ciŋe i kome wek waŋe oyabbe.” 	In a vision he has seen a man named Ananias come and place his hands on him to restore his sight.”
nyik cok kany 	draw near here 
tye ka pal callo ngat ma tye ki aona opiyo 	he is emaciating like a person who has tuberculosis
ngaa ma tweerro nwenggo tungu man wek opwon ki wan tungune? 	who can climb up this borassus palm so that he may pluck up the fruits for us? 
yer tok kana 	mane of a donkey
kun wuwacci, ‘Ka nene onoŋo wabedo i kare pa kwarowa, kono onoŋo pe waribbe kwedgi ka neko lunebi.’ 	“Woe to you, teachers of the law and Pharisees, you hypocrites! You build tombs for the prophets and decorate the graves of the righteous.
nyol en aye gin me nyonynyo ma tye ki wiye mapek ki purre, gitiyo kwedde me guru mucumar ki me tetto nyonynyo mukene 	a hammer is an instrument which is made up of a heavy metal head and a handle, it is used for hitting nails and for forging metals
Kica pa Lubaŋa doŋ obed kwedwu ducu.	Grace be with you all.
Utmegina, pe myero jo mapol i kinwu gudok lupwony, pien wuŋeyo ni wan lupwony gibiŋolo kop mapek i wiwa makato jo mukene. 	Not many of you should become teachers, my fellow believers, because you know that we who teach will be judged more strictly.
Koni atittiwu lok man ma peya otimme, wek ka bitimme, wuye. 	But the Advocate, the Holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in my name, will teach you all things and will remind you of everything I have said to you.
ted layata ci pe iwek onyot 	cook the potatoes but do not let it mashed
Dok bene yam pe gibwolo Adam, ento gibwolo dako, ci omiyo opoto i bal odoko labalo. 	For Adam was formed first, then Eve.
lacooni dok wekko yer tikke luk twatwal 	this man leaves his beard to get very bushy 
Lim ber mada makatto ka wutye i tim, pien miyo wutitte, ki lok ma ngat man owinynyo ma as pace 	to visit is very good especially if you are in a foreign country, because it makes you tell each other, what news one has heard from home
Litinona, man aye doŋ kare me agikki. Yam gitito botwu ni, lakwor pa Kricito bibino, ento kombeddi lukwor pa Kricito doŋ gubino woko mapol ata	Dear children, this is the last hour; and as you have heard that the antichrist is coming, even now many antichrists have come
Kit meno atito botwu ni, bibedo yomcwiny i nyim lumalaika pa Lubaŋa i kom labalo acel ma oŋut.” 	In the same way, I tell you, there is rejoicing in the presence of the angels of God over one sinner who repents.”
litino tika dong guyubbe me peny?  	are the children now ready or prepared for examinations?
wonne tye kwene? 	where is his father? 
Kombeddi amito wumedde wuwot anyim ki ticwu ca, wucob woko. Wubed ki miti me tyekone ma rom aroma ki maca ma yam wukwoŋo kwede, kun wukwanyo gin ma mitte ki i kom gin ma tye botwu. 	I am not commanding you, but I want to test the sincerity of your love by comparing it with the earnestness of others.
obinno ka remme ki cam 	he came to take away part of his food
romo me rut giteddo labot bot 	sheep for twin's ceremony is cooked without salt 
Ento ka itedo karama, lwoŋ lucan, luŋolo, jo ma komo, ki kutowaŋ, 	But when you give a banquet, invite the poor, the crippled, the lame, the blind,
Lacen owekogi, oa ki i gaŋ ocito i Betania ci obuto kunnu. 	But when the chief priests and the teachers of the law saw the wonderful things he did and the children shouting in the temple courts, “Hosanna to the Son of David,” they were indignant.
i ot col twatwal pe twerro menynye ki kendela keken 	inside the house is too dark and cannot be lit by candles only
ladeb nyette anyetta ka wotto 	the flea moves by jumping about 
an dong anongo ripot me tic meera 	I have already received a report of my work
palaa ne lakke bit mada 	the knife is very sharp
gin mapol ma kello poyo i kom dano macallo mac, bur, moo acid moo acid en aye kello poyo marac twatwal 	there are many things that cause scars, for example, burns by fire, ulcers, acids the acid causes the worst scar which heals with a big keloki
Macalo wan i kare man gikwanowa ni kitwa atir pi remone, makato twatwal-le wabilarre pire ki i kom akemo pa Lubaŋa. 	Very rarely will anyone die for a righteous person, though for a good person someone might possibly dare to die.
kel guniya pambane kany wek adil pamba matek nye	bring me here the gunny bag of cotton so that I may push in more
orro dano ka kwallo kwoo pe ber 	sending people to steal is not good
geddo me otel pud dong ogetto woko 	the building of the hotel at the moment is stuck
Pe myero waol ka tiyo gin maber, pien ka kare oromo, ka cwinywa pe odoko nyap, ci wabikayo kac. 	A man reaps what he sows.
ma naka yang wacak yelle ki catto wil, lim bene pe lwar i tee jebbawa 	ever since we have been struggling with selling things, enough money does not come into our pockets
lageddo myero ogeeni tee ot ka gigerro myerro ocung matek dok ma tuut 	a builder must know that when a house is being built, its foundation must be strong, firm and deep 
tekke tye kwene ma miyo en lanywar twatwal mape dong Iworro luditto? 	where is his power that makes him so abusive and does not respect the elders?
Gin pe jo me lobo, macalo ceŋ an pe a dano me lobo. 	My prayer is not that you take them out of the world but that you protect them from the evil one.
Aŋeyo ni wun likwayo pa Abraim	So if the Son sets you free, you will be free indeed.
Wubed jo ma jolo welo ŋat man ki lawote, kun pe wuŋur bene. 	Therefore be alert and of sober mind so that you may pray.
gin angoo ma imitto? 	what do you want? 
man gin aye winynyi ma beddo i dong nam gicammo rec 	these are the birds which live along the river banks and live by eating fish
Wan jo pa Lubaŋa	We are from God, and whoever knows God listens to us; but whoever is not from God does not listen to us
ka gilwongi ni in igammo ni iyo  	when you are called you answer
wacitu ka wil i cuk 	let us go to buy (something) in the market
citto ni tye awene Gulu? 	when are you going to Gulu? 
gwido lok ni put put 	talking persistently 
Pien Kricito yam pe oyomo cwinye kekene, ento obedo kit macalo yam gicoyo ni, “Yet pa jo ma giyeti kwede doŋ opoto i koma.” 	Each of us should please our neighbors for their good, to build them up.
Iyo, tic pa Cwiny pa Lubaŋa deyone pe bikato maca matek twatwal? 	Now if the ministry that brought death, which was engraved in letters on stone, came with glory, so that the Israelites could not look steadily at the face of Moses because of its glory, transitory though it was,
ladit dong pe twerro beddo i wii lakarac, mitto kom obwol madit 	the old man cannot sit on the lakarac, he needs a big round stool
awobine dok perro lok twatwal ka tye i kilaci miyo pe niang gin ma gipwonynyo 	the boy talks too much when he is in class, that is why he does not understand what is being taught 
mucumar obeddo ni gang 	the nails are in great ngantity or in a mass everywhere 
bonyo tye ka tuk ni piri piri 	the locusts are flying all over around 
litino ma loka caa laworo gulwallo litino ma kany matek mada i tukko lawalla 	the children over the other side of the river yesterday defeated thoroughly the children of this side in the game of circle
tutuno kiyata dong obaarru	the potato mounds have cracked or split open
Ŋat ma miyo kodi bot dano ma laco kodi, ki cam me acama, bimiyowu kodi dok binyayone bene, ci doŋ miyo gin mua i kom cwiny maber ma wutye kwede bedo dit twatwal. 	As it is written: “They have freely scattered their gifts to the poor; their righteousness endures forever.”
pien kwowa cuŋ i kom niye, pe i neno piny ma waneno. 	Therefore we are always confident and know that as long as we are at home in the body we are away from the Lord.
Abimiyo twero bot lucadenna aryo-ni me tito lok pi nino alip acel ki miya aryo ki pyerabicel, ma noŋo guruko boŋo cola.” 	And I will appoint my two witnesses, and they will prophesy for 1,260 days, clothed in sackcloth.”
Adada awacciwu ni, dano ma biwaco ki got man ni, ‘Mukke wek itiŋŋe ipot wa i nam,’ ma kun pe kalo akala i cwinye, ento noŋo oye ni gin ducu ma elego-ni bitimme ci bitimme ada. 	“Truly I tell you, if anyone says to this mountain, ‘Go, throw yourself into the sea,’ and does not doubt in their heart but believes that what they say will happen, it will be done for them.
yer wii latin man twerro binynye maber mada 	the hair on this child's head can be very well twisted into curls
Latin opyello cet i wii kabuto 	the child has defaecated on the bed 
marro lwiyo twatwal  	likes very much to whistle
pimmo bor me wanglobo meegi	to measure the boundaries of their land
nyeeri icitto kwene?  	you fellow where are you going?
gutuuro daa laworo i kingi pi lok mo mape konynyo 	they suddenly started quarrelling over a matter which is useless
ngatte labongo gin mo ma itye kwede pe konynyo 	showing off without having anything is useless
obokko gwen laworo mada 	she half cooked a lot of the white ants (termites) yesterday
en pe opoko-yokki ma iyello twatwal kitmeno	he is not a laughing stock person that you should trouble him like that
gwer me odyer geggo dano noggo twoo odyer 	vaccination against small pox prevents people from getting the small pox
Ka Petero ocito i Jerucalem, ci dul pa jo ma mito ni jo muye Kricito myero koŋ gilirgi gucako ŋono en, 	So when Peter went up to Jerusalem, the circumcised believers criticized him
ginne pud dong ojigo wiya woko  	the thing has so far defeated me
wot maber pii tye ka tagge i wii, i cupuria 	be careful, walk straight, the water is shaking in the saucepan on your head it might pour out
geya ma ojwer nyo dano ma ojwer 	sorghum which is not well developed, or a man who is wasted
komme obeddo ningning?  	what is the colour of its body?
danone ka wulokko kwedde myerro wugwokke pien en twol gola 	when you speak with the man be careful because he is an informer or a double dealer
Koŋ wunyutta kom lim ma giculo kwede mucoro-ni.” Ci gukelo bote. 	But Jesus, knowing their evil intent, said, “You hypocrites, why are you trying to trap me?
pe ber me gunynyo yito kama dano gupong iye 	it is not good to smoke where there are many people 
jwayo bao wek-Obed mapwot 	polishing the board to make it very smooth
litino gitye ka gweyo odilo 	the children are kicking the ball 
Ci gubedo ka wero wer manyen ma waco ni, “In imyero me kwanyo buk adolani, ki me yabo ginanena ma gimwono kwede, pien yam gineki woko, dok pi remoni ikoko dano pi Lubaŋa, ma gua i kaka mapol mapatpat, ki i leb ki rok mapatpat ducu, 	And they sang a new song, saying: “You are worthy to take the scroll and to open its seals, because you were slain, and with your blood you purchased for God persons from every tribe and language and people and nation.
Ladobo mo obino bot Yecu, kun orumo coŋe piny obako doge bote, olege ni, Ka imito, itwero lonyo koma. 	A man with leprosy came to him and begged him on his knees, “If you are willing, you can make me clean.”
Ka owaco lok man, pyem opoto i kin Luparicayo ki Lucadukayo, nio ka Lukiko iye opokke woko. 	When he said this, a dispute broke out between the Pharisees and the Sadducees, and the assembly was divided.
pien pe aŋuny adok ki ŋeya aweko tuco botwu gin ducu ma Lubaŋa oyubo. 	For I have not hesitated to proclaim to you the whole will of God.
Wun lubuta! Wuŋeyo poko kin gin ma nen i lobo ki i polo	Hypocrites! You know how to interpret the appearance of the earth and the sky
twak pa dek i agulo 	the boiling or bubbling of food in the pot
Atye ki lok mapol ma myero aco boti, ento pe amito ni aco ki kalam ki vino. 	We also speak well of him, and you know that our testimony is true.
maarro tukko odilo twatwal 	loves football very much loves 
alwor timme atata ki anyira pi twoo jonynyo 	I fear misbehaving with girls because of AIDS infection 
Ka wun jo maraco wuŋeyo miyo mot mabeco bot litinowu, ci Wonwu ma tye i polo pe bikatowu, bimiyo Cwiny Maleŋ makato bot jo ma lege?” 	If you then, though you are evil, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more will your Father in heaven give the Holy Spirit to those who ask him!”
En oloko lok man pi nyuto kit to ma ebito kwede 	And I, when I am lifted up from the earth, will draw all people to myself.”
Yecu owaco botgi ni, “Ada awaco botwu ni, i kare ma Lubaŋa oketo lobo manyen, ka Wod pa dano bibedo i wi komkerre me deyo, wun jo ma doŋ wulubo kora bene wubibedo i wi komker apar wiye aryo, kun wuŋolo kop i kom kaka apar wiye aryo me Icrael. 	Jesus said to them, “Truly I tell you, at the renewal of all things, when the Son of Man sits on his glorious throne, you who have followed me will also sit on twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.
bongone lac obeddo wolo-wolo 	his cloth is wide and loose
gwok gweyo ka oneno gin mo  	the dog barks when it has seen something
ocitto ka cakka me nyim bot laminne 	she went to beg for simsim from her sister because she has none
lacoone orukko bongo ma anyim anyim 	the man won a greyish cloth 
yang gidaa mada, ento kombeddi dong guribbe, pe dong gidaa 	they used to quarrel very much, but now they have reconciled, and they do not quarrel
rok i yat man wek obed me bog 	hollow out this wood to be for a beehive
lacoone tye ki rii i wangge ci pieno pe dong nenno piny maber 	the man has cataract in his eyes, therefore, he does not see well
ki dok me pwonnye i kom lok magi: kit batija mapatpat, keto ciŋ i wi dano, cer pa jo muto, ki kop ma giŋolo matwal. 	instruction about cleansing rites, the laying on of hands, the resurrection of the dead, and eternal judgment.
ka wuyenya, wuwek jo man guciti.” 	Jesus answered, “I told you that I am he
jwayo bao wek-Obed mapwot 	to polish the board to make it very smooth
Pien i kare ducu ma wucamo mugati man, dok bene ka wumato ki kikopo-ni, noŋo wutye ka yweko lok me to pa Rwot, nio ka en bidwogo. 	For whenever you eat this bread and drink this cup, you proclaim the Lord’s death until he comes.
ywaane wuno kany 	draw near here
lac twerro juurre kany 	the urine can be passed here
kare mukene lek nyutto gin ma mitto timme	sometimes dream reveals what is to come 
ento Lubaŋa ocike i waŋ lek omiyo owoto ocito i Galilaya. 	Having been warned in a dream, he withdrew to the district of Galilee,
Pien jo mogo i kingi doŋ guŋak woko, gitye ka lubo Catan. 	So I counsel younger widows to marry, to have children, to manage their homes and to give the enemy no opportunity for slander.
twara ma idonyo i kwo ma waŋi lakucel, kato ma kono giboli ki waŋi aryo ducu i mac Geena. 	It is better for you to enter life with one eye than to have two eyes and be thrown into the fire of hell.
pimmo bor me wanglobo meegi 	measuring the boundaries of their land
angooyi nyong	I have beaten you for nothing
takko wii kongo me abila	to pour a small quantity of beer for tasting
Luparicayo guwacce ni, “In giri ibolo lok me caden i komi keni, lok ma ibolo pe me ada.” 	Whoever follows me will never walk in darkness, but will have the light of life.”
ladit pa latic meno bidwogo i nino ma en pe tamo pi dwogone, dok i cawa ma en pe ŋeyo, 	The master of that servant will come on a day when he does not expect him and at an hour he is not aware of.
yen man twearo bane 	this wood can be split
ceng opuk 	the sun has risen
oyokko wiye ni taar 	he knocked his head very hard against something 
tekko litino ma gitye ka Iweny	to stop the children who are fighting
nyanynyo gwiny wii kom 	sitting comfortably on the chair
rum wiye i ot 	surround him in the house
En kikome okelo kuc i kinwa, omiyo wan kwedwu doŋ wadoko lwak acel. Pi miyo kome kene en doŋ okwanyo mone woko ki i kinwa macalo doŋ omuko cel ca ma yam poko kinwa woko-ni. 	But now in Christ Jesus you who once were far away have been brought near by the blood of Christ.
dero mo ma ryeny obedo pe pi dul acel me adek me dyeceŋ ki dul acel me adek me dyewor bene. 	A third of the day was without light, and also a third of the night.
I kare ma pud tye ka lok, nen, tipo pol ma ryeny oumogi woko lipuk, ci dwan owinnye ki i pol ma wacci “Man aye Woda ma amaro	Just then there appeared before them Moses and Elijah, talking with Jesus.
pe geene ka ngati mo tye ki river me yiir ma en twerro yiiro ki dano mo 	it is uncertain whether there is anybody who has the power of bewitching which he can bewitch any person
ocitto ka tukko me toyo iye 	he went to play to relieve his fullness from eating food
Yecu openyogi ni, “Litino, wunoŋo dek mo twal?” Gudokke iye ni, “Pe”. 	Early in the morning, Jesus stood on the shore, but the disciples did not realize that it was Jesus.
En aye gin mumiyo Lujudaya gulibo Yecu, pien otimo jami magi i cabit. 	The man went away and told the Jewish leaders that it was Jesus who had made him well.
kadi wa i kare man bene pud inonggo okoto wii acikari pa Samuel Baker ma ginekkongi i tungu i yoo Bugatira 	even up to now you can still find the skulls of the soldiers of Samuel Baker who were killed in the Borasus Palms on the way to Bugatira
Iye lit 	he has abdominal pain stomachache 
reeno dong ki rangi ma ocwak ocwak	smearing the lips with yellow colour
gijukkongi ki tek onongo dong guyaarro woko ka lweny 	they were about to fight when they were forcefully stopped
ryebbo dong agulo pii piny	to turn the waterpot upside down 
orro kweri ki i kom purre 	removing the hoe from its shaft
myerro gipwuu wii lyelli maber dok gicoo iye nyingge 	the grave should be properly made and his name inscribed on it 
intingo wic ki leb	you will take the head as well as the tongue
lapet piny nyo apetti 	a vagabond, a person who roams about aimlessly
John Lye ka tic 	John is at work
Wuket cwinywu i noŋo mot ma pigi dito.	Now eagerly desire the greater gifts.
Ci ocikogi matek twatwal ni pe gutit bot ŋat mo ni en e Kricito ma Lubaŋa oyero. 	Then he ordered his disciples not to tell anyone that he was the Messiah.
Okwanye ki i kom yatariya, ci oboye ki boŋo camanini maleŋŋe, ka opyele i lyel ma gikwinyo i got, ka ma peya gipyelo iye kom ŋat mo. 	Then he took it down, wrapped it in linen cloth and placed it in a tomb cut in the rock, one in which no one had yet been laid.
juny ot mo kany ma ka ibinno ka yweyo ci ibeddo iye 	build a small house here where you stay when you come for your holidays
gitye ka pwoddo owiny lukwoo mada ki anino 	they are beating thoroughly the buttocks of the thieves with the hippopotamus hide 
Jo mapol guye en ki kunnu.	They said, “Though John never performed a sign, all that John said about this man was true.”
ka twon dyel oito min dyel i kare ma gitye ka tinggo pyer min dyel gumme nyo min dyel gummo pyerre 	when a he goat is mounting a she goat the she goat's waist becomes flexed
Dok i odiko wuwacci, ‘Tin kot bicwer madit, pien polo nen makwar, dok ocido woko licuc.’ Wuŋeyo poko kin gin ma nen i pol, ento pe wutwero poko lanyut me kare. 	and in the morning, ‘Today it will be stormy, for the sky is red and overcast.’ You know how to interpret the appearance of the sky, but you cannot interpret the signs of the times.
Ci Yecu odok iye botgi ni, “Wugwokke, ŋatti mo owek rwenyowu. 	Jesus answered: “Watch out that no one deceives you.
nyim otwii ni jum 	the simsim germinated all together in one place
cim kombeddi dong okonynyo dano mada me titto lok ma otimme ki lawotti labongo galle 	the telephone has now helped people very much 
twok meja  	angle of the table
moo yaa rubbe maber mada ki nyuka kal 	Shea butter nut oil mixes very well with millet gruel 
olokoro en aye oceke ma yamo wok iye citto i oboo, ma giyuyo ki woko, ma katto ki i um 	trachea is a wind pipe through which the air, passes into the lungs, that has been breathed in, through the nose, from outside
Jo maryek tye kwene? Lupwony-cik kono tye kwene? Lupyem me lobo man tye kwene? Lubaŋa pe oloko ryeko me lobo man odoko me miŋo? 	Where is the wise person? Where is the teacher of the law? Where is the philosopher of this age? Has not God made foolish the wisdom of the world?
ka koyo nekki ci cit woko ka oyo nyango 	if you feel cold go out to warm yourself with the sunshine
mon man ducu coogi tye kwene?  	where are the husbands of these women?
Pi meno wan myero waketu cwinywa twatwal i gin ma yam wawinyo, wek pe waŋak woko ki iye. 	We must pay the most careful attention, therefore, to what we have heard, so that we do not drift away.
en bene oto, jo ma gilube bene guket woko ata. 	He too was killed, and all his followers were scattered.
Ento dano gibikok bote niŋniŋ, ma peya guye en? Gitwero ye en kono niŋniŋ ka pe guwinyo lok ma gitito i kome? Gitwero winyo lok i kome niŋniŋ ka ŋat mo pe ma tito lokke botgi? 	for, “Everyone who calls on the name of the Lord will be saved.”
yubbe ka jwet wek koni pe gimakki 	be prepared to run so that you may not be arrested 
“Ibikoko aŋee, in Korajin! Ibikoko aŋee, in Betecaida! Pien kono yam tic madito me twer ma gitiyo botwu gitiyo i Turo ki Cidon, kono jone guŋut wa con, kun giruko boŋo cola ma gibedo i buru bene. 	“Woe to you, Chorazin! Woe to you, Bethsaida! For if the miracles that were performed in you had been performed in Tyre and Sidon, they would have repented long ago, sitting in sackcloth and ashes.
Lupwonnyene guwacce ni, “Rwot, ka onino, ci bicaŋ.” 	After he had said this, he went on to tell them, “Our friend Lazarus has fallen asleep; but I am going there to wake him up.”
yorre pul manok i kom ratili ma ipimmoni 	add to him a little more some groundnuts to the pounds that you have measured
Ento en odok iye ni, “Wun aye wumigi ginacama.” Gin gugamo ni, “Wacit wawil kwon me ciliŋ miya aryo, wami botgi wek gucam?” 	But he answered, “You give them something to eat.” They said to him, “That would take more than half a year’s wages! Are we to go and spend that much on bread and give it to them to eat?”
piny dong tye ka waarre 	the weather is clearing up now 
puggo dong bege tek mada 	closing the bank's door is very difficult
Man aye mumiyo amito ni co myero guleg Lubaŋa i kabedo ducu, kun gitaŋo ciŋgi maleŋ malo laboŋo kiniga nyo daa mo. 	And for this purpose I was appointed a herald and an apostle—I am telling the truth, I am not lying—and a true and faithful teacher of the Gentiles.
lok ma kiteno twerro miyo dano lweny	such words can incite people to fight
lyak yadi mapol gitiyo kwedde me yadi me cango twoo 	many roots of trees are used for the treatment of diseases
I kom nino ma giciko, Kerode oruko iye jor me kerre, oito obedo kwede i wi komker, oyabo lok botgi. 	On the appointed day Herod, wearing his royal robes, sat on his throne and delivered a public address to the people.
yub dwanni maber 	clear your throat 
gimakko lulibbo mogo laworo dyewor 	some of the terrorists were arrested last night 
en won pe ngeyo gin ma watye ka timmone 	he does not know what we are doing
bao man twerro cweerre maber mada 	this wood can be well scraped 
ngaa ma okwotto cet ma gwee kany twatwalli 	who has passed very bad smelling here
tak wii kongo manok imii ki dano 	remove a little bit of the beer and give it to the people
odure katti woko	odure comeout of the kitchen
i dyel man twerro ryekke	the abdomen of this goat can be ripped open 
Ento lukworra magi, ma gin gukwera ni pe alogi-ni, wukelgi kany, wunekgi ki pala lucwan i nyima.’ ”	But those enemies of mine who did not want me to be king over them—bring them here and kill them in front of me.’”
Pe myero wun wubed kit meno	Not so with you
Wun litino, wuwiny lunyodowu i lok ducu, pien meno aye yomo cwiny Rwot. 	Husbands, love your wives and do not be harsh with them.
Pi meno omiyo abedo ki yomcwiny madwoŋ, leba bene loko ki yomcwiny, nino ducu abedo maber kun atye ki gen. 	Therefore my heart is glad and my tongue rejoices; my body also will rest in hope,
Ento agamo ni ‘Pe, Rwot, pien peya jami ata ki me kwer odonyo i doga.’ 	“I replied, ‘Surely not, Lord! Nothing impure or unclean has ever entered my mouth.’
Anyira ma lumiŋŋu gutero taragi laboŋo moo, 	The foolish ones took their lamps but did not take any oil with them.
wulok lawang acel 	speak uniformly the same words, speak all of you at once
Lujudaya mapol gukwano lok man, pien ka ma giguro iye Yecu onoŋo tye cok ki gaŋ, dok gicoyo i leb Ibru, i leb Roma ki i leb Grik. 	It read: jesus of nazareth, the king of the jews.
wulub kit kwo ma myero bot Lubaŋa ma olwoŋowu i kerre ki i deyone. 	encouraging, comforting and urging you to live lives worthy of God, who calls you into his kingdom and glory.
Lukwena gudwogo bot Yecu gutitte lok ducu ma gutiyo ki ma gupwonyo. 	The apostles gathered around Jesus and reported to him all they had done and taught.
pien wabedo ka winyo en ka loko ni Yecu man me Najaret bimuko ot man woko, ka dok biloko kit ma yam Moses omiyowa me aluba.” 	For we have heard him say that this Jesus of Nazareth will destroy this place and change the customs Moses handed down to us.”
lyec en aye lee acel madit ma loyo lee mukene ducu 	an elephant is one animal that is bigger than any other animals
twerro kette cibbe cibbe i wii meja 	can be placed or put on top of the table 
en aye ma tubbo dano ki lok atata miyo as iye Iweny 	he is the instigator of the people with useless words which incite the people to fight
nyang marro kanne i tee lajuu 	the Banyoro love very much the dance with rattles tied on their legs
tyen mapol wic ma din ni juny, en aye nyugi bene beddo iye 	frequently very much hair is also the place where many lice do live
Gucito ki awobi meno makwo, cwinygi obedo yom matek. 	The people took the young man home alive and were greatly comforted.
cokko litino wek pe guwoo 	shouting at the children to stop them from making noise
gin ducu ma ibimiyo makato, an abiculi ka adwogo.’ 	‘Look after him,’ he said, ‘and when I return, I will reimburse you for any extra expense you may have.’
ngoo bongi man ducu maber 	iron all these clothes very well 
dano ma onoŋo tye i wi ot pe dok olor piny, pe bene odony i ot ka kwanyo iye gin mo, 	Let no one on the housetop go down or enter the house to take anything out.
dako meno en aye Agar. 	These things are being taken figuratively: The women represent two covenants
en mitto ngoo, mitto lweny? 	what does he likes does he Wants to fight? 
en catto waar mabecco mada 	what are you selling? 
litino giimaarro mwoddo anyogi ajiya mada	children love very much eating cooked dry maize
gan gin ma en otimmo piiwa tin 	wonder at what he did for us today
lokwu miyo chine tirri woko ka coc 	your words discouraged him from writing 
dongge cele 	he has poor appetite 
en ŋat ma kite atir oto pi jo ma kitgi pe atir, wek omi ekelwa bot Lubaŋa. Yam gineko kome, ento gicere woko i cwiny. 	For Christ also suffered once for sins, the righteous for the unrighteous, to bring you to God
Utmegiwa, wamito wuŋe pi cwiny me kica ma oa ki bot Lubaŋa ma onen bot lwak dano ma guye Kricito ducu ma gitye i Makedonia. 	Touch no unclean thing, and I will receive you.”
polic gitye ka dorre 	the police are drilling 
amitto ciling aboro me willo cukari	I want eight shillings for buying sugar
Lwak jo mapol ma gubedo jo mukwoŋo yo gin aye gibidoŋ cen, ki jo ma gudoŋ cen, gin aye dok bitelo yo.”. 	But many who are first will be last, and the last first.”
wuciti, wugwok maber mada kit macalo wutwero.” 	“Take a guard,” Pilate answered
myero koŋ meno otimme, ento noŋo nino me agik pud peke. 	Such things must happen, but the end is still to come.
moko me aguurra nyuka 	flour for making gruel 
rwot oyee ni lokke gitti kwede 	the king assented that the words be used or the king has given his assent for the use of the words
Ka yamo ma a tuŋ acuc ocako kodo mot mupye, gutamo ni doŋ orwatte ki tamgi. Guywayo lajuk mel woko ki i pii, gucako kwaŋ gurabo Kurete ma cok ki tura. 	When a gentle south wind began to blow, they saw their opportunity; so they weighed anchor and sailed along the shore of Crete.
lacoone lapyedda mada, mitto mere latin nyako me mwaka apar wiye aryo ni obed dakone 	the man is mad, he wants a little girl of twelve years to be his wife
tye ka lurro pii me amatta 	he is pouring out the water slowly and carefully, leaving out dirt behind or filtering the water for drinking
Pi meno dano ducu ma bituco nyiŋa i nyim dano, an bene abituco nyiŋe i nyim Wora ma tye i polo, 	“Whoever acknowledges me before others, I will also acknowledge before my Father in heaven.
an pud atye ka lwok i kulo cit icung ki i wii terra ka ikura iye 	I am still washing myself, go and wait for me on the high raised ground
I lobo kunnu onoŋo tye iye lukwat ma gibedo i tim, kun gigwoko romigi dyewor. 	And there were shepherds living out in the fields nearby, keeping watch over their flocks at night.
Piŋo pe wuniaŋ ni an pe aloko botwu lok i kom mugati kikome? Wugwokke i kom tobi pa Luparicayo ki pa Lucadukayo.” 	How is it you don’t understand that I was not talking to you about bread? But be on your guard against the yeast of the Pharisees and Sadducees.”
Wutye ki gum ka giyetowu pi nyiŋ Kricito, pien noŋo cwiny me deyo, ma en Cwiny pa Lubaŋa, bedo i komwu. 	But rejoice inasmuch as you participate in the sufferings of Christ, so that you may be overjoyed when his glory is revealed.
Ka Yecu doŋ oo i lobo ma cok ki Cecaria Pilipi, ci openyo lupwonnyene ni, “Dano mono giwacci Wod pa dano en aŋa?” 	When Jesus came to the region of Caesarea Philippi, he asked his disciples, “Who do people say the Son of Man is?”
Orwone Jon oneno Yecu kun woto bino tuŋ bote, owaco ni, “Nen Latinromo pa Lubaŋa ma kwanyo bal me lobo! 	This all happened at Bethany on the other side of the Jordan, where John was baptizing.
cuk cwiny lawotti kace tyye i pekko wek cwinynye abed matek 	counsel your friend if he has a big problem so that he may be strong and overcome it
kicce nok pe rommo dano, dong me abilla keken	the honey is not enough for everybody and therefore it is only for tasting
pien maro rokwa, en aye ogero kacokkewa.” 	because he loves our nation and has built our synagogue.”
niangge i lok ma kitmeno pe yot yot 	to understand each other in such talks are not easy
Wuniaŋ maber ni, pe tye ŋat mo i kin lutim tim abor nyo tim caro, nyo jo ma wor i kom jami, ma binoŋo dul mo ma bedo mere i ker pa Kricito ki pa Lubaŋa. 	Nor should there be obscenity, foolish talk or coarse joking, which are out of place, but rather thanksgiving.
olik dek ma pirre tek mada ki joo Lamogi 	olik is a very important food for the people of Lamogi 
“Ladit, laticca tye twoyo two akweya, obuto piny i gaŋŋa, ma noŋo arem doŋ oketo kome woko.” 	When Jesus had entered Capernaum, a centurion came to him, asking for help.
kono yam gubedo dano ma mewa, kono gumedde ki bedo botwa. Ento gin gua woko ki botwa wek onen ka maleŋ ni gin ducu pe gubedo dano ma mewa. 	For if they had belonged to us, they would have remained with us; but their going showed that none of them belonged to us.
Ka gumedde ka penye, en oille malo, owaccigi ni, “Ŋat ma i kinwu ma pe ki bal okwoŋ cele ki got.” 	and said to Jesus, “Teacher, this woman was caught in the act of adultery.
yaar kolo ki dano gubed iye  	spread the papyrus mat for people to sit on
gucitto ka menynyo gwen aribu 	they went to trap the aribu white ants with lights
Lubaŋa okelo Lalar bot jo Icrael ki i kin likwayo pa laco meno, macalo yam, ociko, en Yecu. 	“From this man’s descendants God has brought to Israel the Savior Jesus, as he promised.
ka kono gicoyogi ki acel acel, atamo ni kadi lobo kulu pe twero romo buk ma gicoyo.	Jesus did many other things as well
Yecu dok pe omedo ki dok iye lok mo, omiyo Pilato ouro matek. 	But Jesus still made no reply, and Pilate was amazed.
Ci akok matek pien pe ginoŋo ŋat mo ma myero me yabo buk adola nyo kadi me neno iye. 	I wept and wept because no one was found who was worthy to open the scroll or look inside.
nyat lokke bot dano mapol 	spread the words to many people
Ki wun bene ka ce wuneno gin magi gutimme, ci wuŋe ni en doŋ cok, tye wa i doggola. 	Even so, when you see these things happening, you know that it is near, right at the door.
moo ma oo ca tye ka mee  	the oil that spilt out there is spreading
pe ibed ka bollo jami atata kenynyo ma poyo kom dano 	don't throw things about there which startle the people
yat tye ka jany maber 	the tree is spreading out very well by putting out it's branches 
lobo mewa opong ki kit Iwak lee ma pat pat mada 	our land is full of varieties of all sorts of animals
miya mogo acam bene 	give me some to eat also 
‘Wa apwa me gaŋwu ma omoko i tyenwa, wateŋo i komwu	‘Even the dust of your town we wipe from our feet as a warning to you
ceer dongga okello peko 	Jesus rose on the third day
lacoo ne wakke mada 	the man is very proud or boastful
abaana pe timmo gin ma kitmeno	my father does not do such a thing
opegogi tye ka jukke ki daba 	the pigs are smearing themselves with mud 
Kit meno, in bene itye ki jo mogo ma gumako pwony pa jo Nikolaiti. 	Likewise, you also have those who hold to the teaching of the Nicolaitans.
en aye gin macol, ikare mukene rubbe ki gin matar, ma nyulle woko Ma ki i kom yat 	it is the black substances which sometimes are mixed with white stuff, which exude from the body of a tree
lum ot acel pe weko cwe	a single blade of grass coming off from the grass thatched roof
leggo pi timmo kica	to pray praying for forgiveness 
Kop ma gibiŋolo i komgi en aye can me to ma pe gik, kun giryemogi woko ki i nyim Rwot dok ki i nyim deyo me tekone, 	They will be punished with everlasting destruction and shut out from the presence of the Lord and from the glory of his might
Ento danu-nu ma kwarone pat ki megi-ni ogamo dul acel me apar ki bot Abraim, ka dok olamo gum i kom ŋat ma Lubaŋa ocikke bote. 	This man, however, did not trace his descent from Levi, yet he collected a tenth from Abraham and blessed him who had the promises.
pien onoŋo Cwiny Maleŋ peya gimiyo, pien onoŋo Yecu peya giketo deyo i kome. 	By this he meant the Spirit, whom those who believed in him were later to receive
rue obot tyenni ma iwotto kwedde i dye otti	wipe off your foot marks from the floor on which you walked 
man aye kabeddo kama cam pwodde iye ata 	this is the place where food is in plenty 
awobine lacunna mada 	the boy is always courting, flirting or seducing women 
gicammo ken-gi pi wooro ma gitye kwedde  	they eat by themselves because of their greed for food
caddo twoo marac mada 	diarrhoea is a very bad
igi omen mada pi goc ma gigoyogi kwede 	they were very annoyed for the way in which they were left behind
gweno twerro gwokke maber ka gimatto pii madwong 	chicken can be easily looked after if they take plenty of water
Kombeddi doŋ ico gin ma itye ka nenone-ni, gin ma tye ki gin ma bitimme lacen i anyim. 	“Write, therefore, what you have seen, what is now and what will take place later.
Pe bibedo kit meno i kinwu	Not so with you
ijwiyo pi ngoo? 	why do you hiss? 
boo ringo en ki karatac ci iteer gang 	wrap this meat with paper and then take it home
latwoo omunynyo yat ma gimiye 	the sick person swallowed the medicine given to him
dyelle lapele mitto ogwil matek ka wek pe ocod woko 	the goat is very restless and therefore it needs a strong rope so that it may not break it
Man otimme wek lok ma ceŋ en oloko ocobbe kakare, ni, “I kin jo ma ceŋ imiya, pe tye mo ma orwenyo.” 	If you are looking for me, then let these men go.”
litino gitye ka tukko i lalelee 	the children are playing in the rivulets 
Man aye obedo kit ma yam ginywalo kwede Yecu Kricito. I kare ma minne Maliam Yucepu doŋ ocunu oye, ma peya kingi orwatte, ginoŋo ni Maliam tye ki ic pa Cwiny Maleŋ. 	This is how the birth of Jesus the Messiah came about: His mother Mary was pledged to be married to Joseph, but before they came together, she was found to be pregnant through the Holy Spirit.
lak latin dong cok ka muk woko 	the child's tooth is about to fall off or come out
pien i en Lubaŋa ocweyo jami ducu, gin ma tye i polo ki gin ma tye i wi lobo, gin ma nen ki gin ma pe nen, kadi wa wegi komker ki wegi dito, ki luloc, ki wegi twer ducu. Jami ducu yam giketo pi twerre dok pire bene. 	The Son is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn over all creation.
gadi dong ogak Paico 	so and so has remained at Paico
nyako myerro obed ma wangge pe taar 	a girl must not be loose and lustful
gwaa kor ot ki opuyo 	plaster the wall of the house with clay
Dok awinyo dwan mo maloŋo oa ki i ot pa Lubaŋa ma waco bot lumalaika abiro ni, “Wucit wuony akemo pa Lubaŋa ma tye i atabo abiro ca-ni woko i lobo.” 	Then I heard a loud voice from the temple saying to the seven angels, “Go, pour out the seven bowls of God’s wrath on the earth.”
leggo pi timmo kica	to beg for forgiveness
Ento Lujudaya ma pe guye gutugo Lurok kun gumiyo cwinygi odoko kec i kom utmego. 	But the Jews who refused to believe stirred up the other Gentiles and poisoned their minds against the brothers.
gimakko lakwoo anyogi ma obeddo ka kwallo anyogi pi kare ki kare 	a thief who has been stealing the maize from time to time has been caught
Yecu owaccigi ni, “Wukel rec mogo ma pud wumako amaka-ni.” 	When they landed, they saw a fire of burning coals there with fish on it, and some bread.
wang burre twerro jabbe ki pii ma de de 	the ulcer can be swabbed with lukewarm water
man dano ma nyap pe twerro tic ma mitto tek kom	this a lazy person who cannot do the work that requires strength 
tamme pud dong tek	the idea of it is still difficult
Lubanga tye i wii polo 	God is in heaven 
atweyo jo pa Lubaŋa mapol i mabuc kun atiyo ki twer ma anoŋo ki bot ajwagi madito. Ka ginekogi, abolo kwir ni myero gito. 	On the authority of the chief priests I put many of the Lord’s people in prison, and when they were put to death, I cast my vote against them.
Yecu dok iye owaŋ matek, ojwat, ci obino i lyel	But some of them said, “Could not he who opened the eyes of the blind man have kept this man from dying?”
Omiyo Yecu obolo botgi carolok man ni, 	Then Jesus told them this parable:
pyerre tye ka nide 	his waist is becoming thin
kun giwaco ni, “Lubaŋa omi gum i kom Kabaka ma bino i nyiŋ Rwot! Kuc obed i wi polo, ki deyo obed i kabedo ma malo twal!” 	“Blessed is the king who comes in the name of the Lord!” “Peace in heaven and glory in the highest!”
dobo gunno cing danno	leprosy causes cuts off fingers
Ŋat ma dag ominne meno lanek, dok bene wuŋeyo ni, pe tye lanek mo ma kwo ma pe tum bedo i iye. 	Anyone who hates a brother or sister is a murderer, and you know that no murderer has eternal life residing in him.
En ogamo doggi ni, Dok wakobu woko i gaŋ mukene ma tye cok ki kany, wek acitit lok kunnu bene	Jesus replied, “Let us go somewhere else—to the nearby villages—so I can preach there also
ongom, teer wek gitweny obed atiir 	this piece of wood is bent, take it to be straightened 
puyo kom ot 	to plaster the house or to decorate decorating the house 
Remo pa lutit lok pa Lubaŋa ki pa jo maleŋa, remo pa jo ducu ma yam ginekogi i lobo, ginoŋo tye i Babilon.”	In her was found the blood of prophets and of God’s holy people, of all who have been slaughtered on the earth.”
Utmegiwa ma Lubaŋa maro, waŋeyo ni Lubaŋa doŋ otyeko yerowu,, 	For we know, brothers and sisters loved by God, that he has chosen you,
Pilipo ocito i gaŋ mo me lobo Camaria ci otuco botgi pi Kricito ma Lubaŋa oyero. 	Philip went down to a city in Samaria and proclaimed the Messiah there.
En yam oto pi dano ducu, wek jo makwo pe gumedde ki bedo kwo pigi kengi, ento gubed ki kwo pi ŋat ma yam oto ka ocer pigi ca. 	For Christ’s love compels us, because we are convinced that one died for all, and therefore all died.
lwonggo gwokke ki lwiyo keken 	calls his dong by whistling only 
ngeyo kwok ki i wang 	wiping perspiration from the face
Lujudaya guwacce ni, “In ma mwakani bene peya oromo pyerabic-ci, ineno Abraim?” 	My Father, whom you claim as your God, is the one who glorifies me.
Ento jo mukene guwaco ni, “En Elia”, jo mukene ni, “En lanebi, cal ki ŋat mo i kin lunebi macon.” 	Others said, “He is Elijah.” And still others claimed, “He is a prophet, like one of the prophets of long ago.”
“Ento nino meno ki cawa meno pe tye ŋat mo ma ŋeyo, kadi wa lumalaika ma i polo, kadi wa Wod, ento Lubaŋa Won kene aye ŋeyo gire. 	“But about that day or hour no one knows, not even the angels in heaven, nor the Son, but only the Father.
Kit meno gaŋ iye orubbe woko	Soon the whole city was in an uproar
Ka doŋ wuneno can pi kare manok, Lubaŋa lami kica ducu, ma olwoŋowu i Kricito Yecu me nywako deyone ma ri nakanaka, en kikome aye ma bidwokowu kakare, bimiyowu tek, dok bimiyo wucuŋ matek likiŋ. 	Resist him, standing firm in the faith, because you know that the family of believers throughout the world is undergoing the same kind of sufferings.
Ajwagi mukene ca onoŋo yam welgi dwoŋ, pien to onoŋo ogeŋo nyimgi woko wek pe gumedde ki tic, 	Now there have been many of those priests, since death prevented them from continuing in office;
bongo me tic i ot yat. 	clothes for working in the hospital
dako ometto cam moo ametta me aura ma dano ducu gucammo kwee oloyogi woko 	the woman made such a wonderful large amount of food that people ate as much as they could but failed to finish it
pii awobe ni wek gubed ki twiny me pyem me loyo odilo nyo me medde me citto malo i tukko mukene ducu 	incite the boys to have the spirit of winning in the football and increasing power of going up in all other sports
gwinne me ringo nennone rac	the way he eats meat bit by bit is stupid
lok tye i komme 	he has a case against him
Kadi bed alone kena i nyim dano ducu, ento doŋ atyeko mine me bedo opii pa jo ducu, wek anoŋgi mapol. 	Though I am free and belong to no one, I have made myself a slave to everyone, to win as many as possible.
Ka dano mo olegi gin mo ci myero imiye, dok bene pe myero ikwer pi den bot ŋat ma mito deno jami ki boti. 	Give to the one who asks you, and do not turn away from the one who wants to borrow from you.
bak tutuno abic me pitto layata 	make five heaps of earth here for planting potatoes
Utmegiwa, kombeddi wacikowu i nyiŋ Rwotwa Yecu Kricito ni, wupokke woko ki i kom ominwu mo ma lawackom ma bedo ka wirre kun balo kare nono labaŋo tic mo, ma pe lubo kit ma myero ma wun wumako ki botwa. 	In the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, we command you, brothers and sisters, to keep away from every believer who is idle and disruptive and does not live according to the teaching you received from us.
Jo ducu gin lukwena? Jo ducu gitye ki mot me tito lok pa Lubaŋa? 	Are all apostles? Are all prophets? Are all teachers? Do all work miracles?
pe igwar wii Latin 	do not scratch the child's head
latin menne ma tin okok twatwal dyeworri? 	which child cried very much at night? 
Dok bene miyo jo ma ryekogi oballe, ma mako lok me ada oloyogi woko, gibedo ka wo awoya nono, kun gitamo ni dini aye yo me noŋo lonyo. 	They have an unhealthy interest in controversies and quarrels about words that result in envy, strife, malicious talk, evil suspicions
tye ki twit me nekko lee 	he has amulet for killing animal
cakko nying me doggola	to name the child soon after birth 
kit gocco me goyo gwiny litino odoo apar rac mada 	the beating of children' buttocks ten lashes is very bad 
bur kanca pe cagge ki yat keken 	ulcer cancer cannot be cured with medicine alone
wic ma obeddo arot arot 	a head which is oval 
Kono jo ma tye ka balo cwinywu-ni gumedde anyim, gukolle woko kekengi gigi! 	Brothers and sisters, if I am still preaching circumcision, why am I still being persecuted? In that case the offense of the cross has been abolished.
man en aye tic ma kello olo oyot 	this is the work that brings tiredness quickly 
obinno odiko ma ceng pudi katti ni piri 	he came in the morning when the rising sun's ray was still flickering brightly
mac tye ka lyel caa 	the fire is burning over there 
onoŋo piny doŋ col. 	As soon as Judas had taken the bread, he went out
litino gitye ka genne i kweyo 	the children are rolling in the sand 
Ento i kare ma ber ki mar me kica pa Lubaŋa Lalarwa onen, 	We lived in malice and envy, being hated and hating one another.
Tomaci, ŋat acel i kin jo apar wiye aryo, ma gilwoŋo ni Baŋi, onoŋo pe botgi i kare ma Yecu obino. 	And with that he breathed on them and said, “Receive the Holy Spirit.
Dok abiketo tek, wek wubed ki gin ma poyo wiwu i lok magi kare ducu, ka doŋ ato woko. 	And I will make every effort to see that after my departure you will always be able to remember these things.
cupa adii me limp ma dong otoo 	how many bottles of beer that have been broken? 
gwakke pe rac 	embracing one another is not bad 
lagada ber mada me goyo eel ma rummo gang 	the reeds are very good for building up a fence round the home 
Gin ma mitte keken aye ni myero wamedde me cuŋ matek i yo ma doŋ wao iye. 	And if on some point you think differently, that too God will make clear to you.
i oro toyo dok pe tye twatwal 	in the dry season there is not much dew
lukwooni twerro rumme i ot 	the thieves can be surrounded in the house 
Pien ka ma lonyowu tye iye, cwinywu bene bedo iye. 	For where your treasure is, there your heart will be also.
dongge twerro gamme maber 	the mouth can be opened 
ka cam tye manok, luditto nino ducu dong gijallo cam meegi ki litino 	normally when the food is not enough, the elders leave the it for the children
Ci mar Rwot Lubaŋani ki cwinyi ducu, ki tiponi ducu, ki tammi ducu ki tekki ducu.’ 	Love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your mind and with all your strength.’
owinynyo ni lungwec mukene ma gua woko tye mapol ci orwoo woko me citto ka riggo ngwec mabor me kin gang 	when he heard that, there were many people from outside, who were also taking part, he gave up taking part in the cross country race
Pien jo mogo ma gua ki bot Koloe gutitta lok i komwu, ni meno daa tye i kinwu, utmegina. 	My brothers and sisters, some from Chloe’s household have informed me that there are quarrels among you.
Wumi gin ma i atabowu bot lucan wek okonygi	“Woe to you Pharisees, because you give God a tenth of your mint, rue and all other kinds of garden herbs, but you neglect justice and the love of God
nywarro dano pe ber 	scorning people is not good  
Onoŋo tye iye kit kwa lee ducu, wa kwa anyai ducu ki winyo me polo. 	It contained all kinds of four-footed animals, as well as reptiles and birds.
Yecu odokke iye ni, “Kono nene pe gimiyi twer ma oa ki malo kono pe ibedo ki twer i koma	When Pilate heard this, he was even more afraid,
bongo pamba yom dok pe yilloo kom dano 	cotton fabrics are soft and do not irritate the skin
ribbo wego acel	sharing the same father 
Iŋeyo cik, ni, ‘Pe itim abor, Pe ineki, Pe ibed caden me goba, Wor woru ki meni.’ ” 	You know the commandments: ‘You shall not commit adultery, you shall not murder, you shall not steal, you shall not give false testimony, honor your father and mother.’”
dano ma tye ki Moo anino en aye nino pi kare ducu 	a man who has sleeping sickness is the one who sleeps most of the time
ojuyo litino ni pe gubal pii 	he reprimanded or ordered the children not to waste water
latin gweno oloyo jwit jwit, olwit Twit ojayo piny nom ka gene 	the chick narrowly escaped, the hawk grabbed the ground very close to it
purro poto ma gweg lye iye miyo lak kweri our oyot oyot 	to cultivate in a field where there are rocks, the hoe's blade wears out very quickly
wit kal ma widi 	the unthreshed millet
leg yoo wek gukatti  	move away to let them pass
Ka ŋat mo tamo ni en latit lok pa Lubaŋa, nyo etye ki mot mogo me Cwiny, myero oŋe ni, lok ma acoyo botwu-ni en aye cik mua ki bot Rwot. 	If anyone thinks they are a prophet or otherwise gifted by the Spirit, let them acknowledge that what I am writing to you is the Lord’s command.
Ento Yecu odok iye ki dano-nu ni, “Maa aŋa? Ki omegina kono aŋagi?” 	Someone told him, “Your mother and brothers are standing outside, wanting to speak to you.”
wang coo me lobowa tye en 	this is the boundary of our land 
pii malyet bollo cing 	hot water causes blisters 
ka yang lyelli tye man kono owacci ngoo? 	if the late was there, what would he have said? 
Pe myero wabed ka wakke awaka, pe wabutte ki tek i kom luwotwa, dok pe myero wabed ki nyeko i kinwa kenwa.	Since we live by the Spirit, let us keep in step with the Spirit.
bicakko tuk ki kany 	he will start flying from here 
bilo ber me teddo woko 	the charcoal is good for cooking outside 
Magi ducu gubedo cik ki pwony pa dano, ma kemo mere jami ma tum woko ka gitiyo kwedgi-ni. 	“Do not handle! Do not taste! Do not touch!”?
poor bongo man ka rommi wek giwil 	try this cloth on if it fits you, may buy it
moko mungati ma ginywango dong tye ka yeny	the wheat flour which was kneaded (dough) is now rising 
ŋat ma camo kwon man bibedo kwo nakanaka.” 	This is the bread that came down from heaven
Yecu dok odaŋŋe ki dwan maloŋo, ka doŋ omiyo kwone woko. 	When some of those standing there heard this, they said, “He’s calling Elijah.”
cwal candukke aget wek pe oget i doggola 	push the box on the side so that it may not stick on the door
dano mapol pe gingeyo tallo rec maber 	many people do not know how to smoke fish well
dano giwirro komgi i kit yoo ma patpat ki luronyo ka gicitto ka myel 	the people smear their bodies in different fashion when they go to dance
odwogga cen buk ma oterro	he returned to me the book that he took
Giguro Yecu i kom yatariya i cawa adek me odiko. 	It was nine in the morning when they crucified him.
lakwat ocitto ka kwayo dyangi	the shepherd has gone to look after the cattle
Man dok pud ikuro aŋo? Doŋ ia malo gibatija in, gilwok balli woko kun ilwoŋo nyiŋe.’ 	And now what are you waiting for? Get up, be baptized and wash your sins away, calling on his name.’
cwee mukeka ki an 	knit a mat for me 
yoo twerro janynye ki kany ma dano twerro wok iye 	the path can be made here where people can pass through by parting the grass
dano guol woko ki tinggo teer pa muni 	people are tired of carrying goods made by Europeans
Yecu dok ogamo doge owacce ni, “Yam giwaco ni, ‘Pe item i Rwot Lubaŋani.’ ” 	Jesus answered, “It is said: ‘Do not put the Lord your God to the test.’”
I ŋe mwaka adek acito i Jerucalem ka limo Kepa, ci abedo kunnu pi nino apar wiye abic. 	to reveal his Son in me so that I might preach him among the Gentiles, my immediate response was not to consult any human being.
Ka ce jo ma cobo cik gin aye jo ma wi lobo-ni ducu bedo megi, kono niye doŋ konnye pe, ki cikke bene kono konnye pe. 	It was not through the law that Abraham and his offspring received the promise that he would be heir of the world, but through the righteousness that comes by faith.
atye ki dyegi abic me acatta	I have five goats for sale 
cat cukari ma tye i kicaa man 	sell the sugar in this bag
I acakki piny Lok onoŋo tye, Lok tye bot Lubaŋa, Lok en Lubaŋa. 	Because it was the Jewish day of Preparation and since the tomb was nearby, they laid Jesus there.
wod pa Yecu, wod pa Eliejer, wod pa Yorim, wod pa Matat, wod pa Levi, 	the son of Joshua, the son of Eliezer, the son of Jorim, the son of Matthat, the son of Levi,
ento pi jo ma giyero, ma en oyerogi, omiyo en ojwiko wel nino obedo manok. 	But for the sake of the elect, whom he has chosen, he has shortened them.
awar bad en aye ringo mayom maber me acella 	awar bad ill the soft meat that is very good for living
Acoyo botwu waraga man manok kun amiyo i ciŋ Silvano, ma aŋeyo ni ominwa ma genne, pi cuko cwinywu kunu aloko macalo caden ni, man en kica pa Lubaŋa ada	And the God of all grace, who called you to his eternal glory in Christ, after you have suffered a little while, will himself restore you and make you strong, firm and steadfast.
Kadi bed kumeno, dako gibilaro i kare me nywal, ka ce omedde ka bedo ki niye dok ki mar, kun bedo maleŋ ma gwokke kene.	And Adam was not the one deceived; it was the woman who was deceived and became a sinner.
mayo dako pa laremme 	seducing the wife of his friend
Ento ka inyomo, noŋo pe itimo bal mo. Nyako bene ka ginyomo noŋo pe otimo bal. Ento jo ma nyomme gibinoŋo ayelayela me kwo me lobo man	But if you do marry, you have not sinned; and if a virgin marries, she has not sinned
dano mogo marro pyer mon ma tino 	some people like women with narrow waists
cak ma libo ka pe giketto i canduk ma gic ci polo woko 	if fresh milk is not put into the refrigerator, it will curdle
ononggo amitto nenno meeni 	I wanted to see your mother 
ka lokko ci beddo ka gwangge agwangga ki lok 	when speaking he does not speak straight but incoherently 
Okot dok lacen cam mada kadi cam matitkii mo pe miyo ki gad mo 	Okot is very stingy with food and even a small amount of food he does not give it to anybody
Lacen ŋat ma gimiye ciliŋ alip aryo-ni bene obino anyim, owacci, 	“The man with two bags of gold also came
nyoggo laa nio ka odokko ma yom	rumpling and to crumpling until the leather becomes soft
En otimo man wek wapak motte me kica me deyo madit ma en omiyo ki wan pi Wode ma emaro. 	he predestined us for adoption to sonship through Jesus Christ, in accordance with his pleasure and will—
caa ne tikka twerro nongge kany? 	can the watch really be found here? 
pe ngeyo rukke, rukke marac mada 	he does not know how to dress, he dresses very badly
oo mac wek kommi mamyel ki koyoni okee woko 	warm yourself with fire so that the shaking of your body due to cold may disappear
Yecu openye ni, “Dako, ikok piŋo? Iyenyo aŋa?” Otamo ni gwok nyo en lapur-poto, owacce ni, “Ladit, ka in aye itere, titta ka ma ikete iye, wek acikwanye.” 	At this, she turned around and saw Jesus standing there, but she did not realize that it was Jesus.
yenne tye ka mokko mac oo me aoya woko caa 	he is making fire for warming outskie there 
Pien ŋat mo ma obino botwu, ka cako tito botwu pi Yecu mukene mapat ki maca ma watito pire botwu-ni, nyo omiyowu cwiny mapat ma yam pe wutye kwede, nyo otito lok me kwena mo mapat ma yam pe wugamo, meno wudiyo cwinywu iye maber twatwal. 	But I am afraid that just as Eve was deceived by the serpent’s cunning, your minds may somehow be led astray from your sincere and pure devotion to Christ.
wangge opong ki langok 	his face is covered with pimples 
Lwak ducu gutwarre, gutero Yecu i nyim Pilato. 	Then the whole assembly rose and led him off to Pilate.
bongone obeddo ni gwereke	her dress is very short
“ ‘Aŋeyo kit ayelayela ducu ma itye ka cirone, ki can lim bene ma itye kwede (ento in ilony). Aŋeyo bene yet pa jo ma giwaco ni gin Lujudaya, kun i adane gin pe Lujudaya, ento gin gubedo lwak me dul pa Catan. 	I know your afflictions and your poverty—yet you are rich! I know about the slander of those who say they are Jews and are not, but are a synagogue of Satan.
kel mungati ki latin  	bring some bread for the child
i en kikome bal mo pe iye. 	And in him is no sin.
gurummo otgi ki cel nyonyo 	they surrounded their house with an iron fence
Ento wubed ma waŋwu twolo i kare ducu, kun wulego ni myero wubed ki tek me bwot ki i lok magi ducu ma bitimme, ki cuŋ i nyim Wod pa dano.” 	Be always on the watch, and pray that you may be able to escape all that is about to happen, and that you may be able to stand before the Son of Man.”
ma obeddo aciri aciri 	stippling black and white
ywee ki ummi keken pe ki donggi 	try your best, breathe only through your nose not your mouth 
“Aŋa mono ma yam koŋ omiye gin mo me mot, ka en bene odwoko cen bote?” 	“Who has known the mind of the Lord? Or who has been his counselor?”
Awaco kit man ni, laleyo ka pud latin bedo rom ki opii, kadi bed en won jami ducu. 	The life I now live in the body, I live by faith in the Son of God, who loved me and gave himself for me.
lalonynyo pe parro corro lira me willo gin mo kace mitto 	the rich person does not care to pay a lot of money for a thing that he wants
Acoyo waraga man botwu, wun litino ma pud wutino, pien balwu doŋ giweko woko pi nyiŋe. 	I am writing to you, dear children, because your sins have been forgiven on account of his name.
yutto rec ki goli ki i pii 	jerking a fish out with a hook from the water 
Ka ce onoŋo myero anyatte, abinyatte pi gin ma nyuto gorona. 	Who is weak, and I do not feel weak? Who is led into sin, and I do not inwardly burn?
lok goba ni twerro jukke ma pe woo 	this false matter can be prevented from spreading out 
motoka man mere twerro cwalle ci moor 	this car can be pushed and starts 
Wun ma amaro, cikke meno yam giciko piwa. Pi meno, myero walonnye woko kekenwa i gin mo ducu ma cido komwa nyo cwinywa, kun walworo Lubaŋa, wek wadoku jo maleŋ atikatika. 	Not that we lord it over your faith, but we work with you for your joy, because it is by faith you stand firm.
Mumiyo lupwony-cik mogo gucako loko lok kekengi ni, “Dano man tye ka yeto Lubaŋa.” 	Jesus stepped into a boat, crossed over and came to his own town.
Dok otiŋo kikopo, ci opwoyo, ocako miyone botgi, gin gumato. 	Then he took a cup, and when he had given thanks, he gave it to them, and they all drank from it.
onoŋo gitye kacel ki Jon ma lakonygi. 	John was with them as their helper.
pe iput tee okono woko 	do not uproot the pumpkin, but it means that, when you are taking something from some where do not take the whole thing but leave some 
liyo cet leela me noggo nyonyo maber 	melting iron ore to make iron
Yecu olwoŋo bote jone apar wiye aryo, ci oorogi ki aryo aryo, omiyogi twero i kom cen maraco. 	Calling the Twelve to him, he began to send them out two by two and gave them authority over impure spirits.
An a doggola	Therefore Jesus said again, “Very truly I tell you, I am the gate for the sheep.
en timmo jammine akwoo akwoo	he does his things secretly
Yecu owaco ni, “Pud dok abibedo kwedwu pi kare manok, lacen abidok bot ŋat ma yam oora. 	At this they tried to seize him, but no one laid a hand on him, because his hour had not yet come.
gang tuwu tye Palema 	your home is in Palema 
akemo omakke twatwal i komme	Ogwok went to cultivate his preserved field today
nyeerro dano pe ber	laughing at people is not good
Utmegina, amito wuŋe ni, kwarowa ducu yam gubedo i te pol, gin ducu guwok ki i dye nam, 	For I do not want you to be ignorant of the fact, brothers and sisters, that our ancestors were all under the cloud and that they all passed through the sea.
teerre pe tinge ki cing, yee ayeya ki wii 	the load cannot be carried with hands, carry it on your head 
lyer awal i kor ot 	hang suspend the gourd bowl on the wall
ngedi cammo iye mot mot 	there is a slight pain in the abdomen (preceding labour) 
gweno man cinne opong ki kwkii keken 	the intestine of this chicken is full of worms
Ka ce inen gedo pa dano-nu odoŋ, en gedo ma ogero i kom te guti mukwoŋo-ni, dano meno bilimo bakacic me pwoc. 	If what has been built survives, the builder will receive a reward.
ongado iye matek 	he pulled up his belly muscle tightly or he contracted tightly his abdominal muscles
aweno dong twerro pitte i gang i kare man 	the guinea fowls can now be tamed
gumoko mac, gujolowa ducu, pien onoŋ kot ocako cwer ki koyo bene onoŋo ŋic. 	They built a fire and welcomed us all because it was raining and cold.
dyegi mewa 	our goats 
Wan doki wabiwaco gin aŋo? Wabiwaco ni Lurok ma yam pe guyelle pi doko jo ma kitgi atir doŋ gikwanogi ni kitgi atir, ento kitgi ma atir meno gunoŋo pi niye. 	It is just as Isaiah said previously: “Unless the Lord Almighty had left us descendants, we would have become like Sodom, we would have been like Gomorrah.”
laminae obinno laworo  	his sister came yesterday
nyom en aye gin maber ma dano ma mitto beddo wek giworre ci myerro onyom 	marriage is a good thing, which anybody who wants to be respected, he must be married
moro tin omonynyowa ki dyewor 	we were attacked last night by the soldier ants
dogge tek 	he is stubborn and clever at talking
Yecu openyo lupwony-cik ki Luparicayo ni, “Cik ye ni gicaŋ dano i ceŋ cabit, nyo pe?” 	Jesus asked the Pharisees and experts in the law, “Is it lawful to heal on the Sabbath or not?”
amitto cabun me cente pyerabic 	I want a piece of soap for fifty cents
coo mukene girukko roc wek ogeng gin nonggo twoo nyo yacco dako mo ka gibutto kwedgi 	some men put on condoms in order to prevent them from getting infections or impregnating any woman when they sleep with them
Yam tye dano mo ma Lubaŋa ooro, nyiŋe Jon. 	The light shines in the darkness, and the darkness has not overcome it.
joo Alero guloyo ,jo Lamogi woko i lweny 	the Alero people defeated the Lamogi in fighting
wacakko kwan tin 	we start studying today 
en pe dok omi lim mo me konyo wonne nyo minne, 	then you no longer let them do anything for their father or mother.
Lubaŋa Won ki Rwotwa Yecu Kricito omiwu kica ki kuc. 	Grace and peace to you from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
awobe gitye ka gweyo mupira i baar caa 	the boys are playing the football in the field there 
dano tin gutengge mape wacce 	the people today fought each other very badly with sticks
gin ni twerro tinge ci kette i wii meja 	this thing can be lifted and put on the table 
Ento ka doŋ otyeko ŋine kekene, cito woko, wiye wil woko oyotoyot i calle ma en obedo ka nenone twatwal-li. 	and, after looking at himself, goes away and immediately forgets what he looks like.
gucitto ka ngiine 	they went to be examined 
Lunyadone yam gicito i Jerucalem mwaka ki mwaka pi nino madit me Kato. 	Every year Jesus’ parents went to Jerusalem for the Festival of the Passover.
Pe meno keken, ento lwak dano ducu ma guye Kricito yam guyere me wot kacel kwedwa i tic man me kica ma watye ka tiyone pi miyo deyo bot Rwot, ki pi mitiwa me miyo kony bot dano. 	And we are sending along with him the brother who is praised by all the churches for his service to the gospel.
ento wucit bot jo Icrael, ma gitye calo romi murwenyo. 	Go rather to the lost sheep of Israel.
bed mot pe iyegge	be calm do not shake 
Ento Paulo ki Barnaba gudoŋ i Antiokia, kun gipwonyo dano ki tito lok pa Rwot, kacel ki jo mukene mapol bene. 	But Paul and Barnabas remained in Antioch, where they and many others taught and preached the word of the Lord.
Ka piny oru, ci luŋolkop gucwalo askari ka waco ni, “Wek jo meno doŋ guciti.” 	When it was daylight, the magistrates sent their officers to the jailer with the order: “Release those men.”
gwnynye meno gin pa litino pe pa ludito	to pinch is the thing only for children not for adults
Gin jo-nu gijuko ni dano pe gunyom, dok bene giciko dano ni gukwer cam mogo, kun Lubaŋa yam oketo cam wek jo ma ye en, ma giŋeyo lok me ada, gugam ki pwoc. 	Such teachings come through hypocritical liars, whose consciences have been seared as with a hot iron.
Gukelo latin kana bot Yecu. Ka doŋ gupeto ginarukagi i wiye, ci gicibo Yecu i wiye. 	They brought it to Jesus, threw their cloaks on the colt and put Jesus on it.
pak lyedi  	sharpen the razor
Gitye ki twero me loro polo woko wek kot pe ocwer i kare ma noŋo gitye ka tito lok pa Lubaŋa. Gitye-bene ki twero me loko pii wek odok remo, dok me keto can i kom lobo i yo ducu, tyen mapol kit macalo cwinygi mito. 	They have power to shut up the heavens so that it will not rain during the time they are prophesying; and they have power to turn the waters into blood and to strike the earth with every kind of plague as often as they want.
Kombeddi Rwot Yecu kikome, ki Lubaŋa Wonwa ma marowa dok okweyo cwinywa matwal ki gen maber ma obino pi kica, 	May our Lord Jesus Christ himself and God our Father, who loved us and by his grace gave us eternal encouragement and good hope,
Pire oywek i kabedo ducu ma orumo kunnu. 	And the news about him spread throughout the surrounding area.
Meno gin mumiyo jo mapol i kinwu gitwo, dok gigoro bene, ki jo mogo doŋ guto woko. 	That is why many among you are weak and sick, and a number of you have fallen asleep.
dakone bongo cikat makko maber mada 	the skirt fits the woman very well 
wil tyen genggo dano tukko odilo	to sprain of foot prevents people from playing football 
man dong ngide keken aye odong 	these are the only pieces which are remaining 
ma bene doŋ gutyeko bilo lok pa Lubaŋa kit ma mit kwede dok gubilo gin ma bitimme i kare ma bibino i anyim, kit jo meno ka guŋak woko, pe dok gitwero rocogi wek gudok manyen ka doŋ guŋuti. 	who have tasted the goodness of the word of God and the powers of the coming age
latin opotto ci omukko lakke woko 	the child fell down and broke her tooth 
onyommo nyako ma mono kwedde 	he married a girl who was unfit for him
biyo tut woko ki i akwota ma i kom 	squeezing out pus from a swelling in the body
oro en aye karre me dwar pien nongo lum dong otwoo, miyo nenno lee yot 	dry season is the time for hunting because the grass has dried up and makes the animals easily visible
labolo dong oteggi rommo atongga 	the banana is fully developed and ready for harvesting 
ma gujul woko, pien onoŋo gipwonyo lwak kun gitito pi cer pa Yecu ki i kin jo muto atyer. 	They were greatly disturbed because the apostles were teaching the people, proclaiming in Jesus the resurrection of the dead.
nyek maa pe maarra 	the co-wife of my mother does not like me
Pi nyiŋe, ki pi ye nyiŋe, en aye omiyo kom laco man odoko tek macalo wuneno dok wuŋeyo	By faith in the name of Jesus, this man whom you see and know was made strong
luditto pe gimitto kongo agaci, ento tin en aye ma gintaarro mada 	the elders do not like stramed beer, but they like very much dregs of beer
pi gumme omiyo ononggo madit goyo kwir i tuko me odilo 	for his good luck he won a big some of money in the football pools
yenynye me nonggo kama gikanno iye luduko oollo dano mada 	looking for where the gun was hidden tired people completely
Paulo ogamo ni, “Kadi pi kare manok nyo madwoŋ, kono alego Lubaŋa ni idok macalo an, pe in keken ento wa dano ducu ma gitye ka winyo lokka tin, ento laboŋo nyor-ri aye.” 	Paul replied, “Short time or long—I pray to God that not only you but all who are listening to me today may become what I am, except for these chains.”
an alworro cammo pot dek ki nyanya mape giteddo, ma gigwerro agwerra i otel 	I fear to eat cut vegetables and tomatoes in the hotels 
gunya cal mada ki puno nyo kono tkidi 	chimpanzee is very much like a gorilla except that it is small
wua woko ki bota, wun lutim gin maraco.’ 	Then I will tell them plainly, ‘I never knew you
peny ka latin ngeyo 	ask or question whether the child knows 
cwalla kany 	send it to me here
cwinynye tye ka ngabbe pi lok ma gititte 	he is worrying about what he was told 
Waraga man oa ki bot Yakobo ma latic pa Lubaŋa ki Rwotwa Yecu Kricito. Bot kaka apar wiye aryo ma guket woko ata: Amotowu ba. 	James, a servant of God and of the Lord Jesus Christ, To the twelve tribes scattered among the nations: Greetings.
Adada awacciwu ni, nyig bel ka pe opoto i ŋom, oto, bedo kene	Jesus replied, “The hour has come for the Son of Man to be glorified.
Wunen maber ni ŋat mo i kinwu pe ocul gin marac pi tim marac ma gitimo i kome, ento kare ducu wutem me timo ber i kinwu kekenwu ki bot jo ducu. 	Make sure that nobody pays back wrong for wrong, but always strive to do what is good for each other and for everyone else.
ngwee pien onyonno cet gwok 	his foot smells very badly because he stepped on the dog's faeces 
welo tin gonynyo kwene? 	where will the guests lodge? 
tuddo dong woko 	to join together against someone
gigoyo Moro pi tallo latin 	Moro was beaten for casting spell on a child
I kare ma min kulu doŋ oneno, gibole woko piny i ŋom, ci ocako ryemo dako ca ma onoŋo onywalo latin awobini. 	When the dragon saw that he had been hurled to the earth, he pursued the woman who had given birth to the male child.
An aloko gin ma aneno ki bot Wora, wun wutiyo gin ma wuwinyo ki bot wonwu.” 	Yet you are looking for a way to kill me, because you have no room for my word.
joo ma guporre 	the holy people, saints 
twom wii romo ki twor  	knock the ram's head with mallet
“Piŋo moo man pe gicato i wel me ciliŋ miya adek, wek gimi bot lucan?” 	But one of his disciples, Judas Iscariot, who was later to betray him, objected,
corro mon ma tye ka lwok pe ber 	coming suddenly upon the women who are bathing is not good
gucammo gwen madwong mada laworo ci tin gitye ka cadde kwedde mape wacce 	they ate a lot of termites yesterday and today they are having much diarrhoea
lac ngwecce kiir 	urine has pungent smell
nek mac matye i ot beddo woko 	switch off the light in the sitting room 
Ajwaka madit openyo Yecu pi lupwonnyene, ki i kom lok ma en pwonyo. 	Because this disciple was known to the high priest, he went with Jesus into the high priest’s courtyard,
Kit meno yo pud tye twolo wek jo mogo gudony iye. Jo ma yam gikwoŋo tito botgi lok me kwena maber pe gudonyo, pien gin gukwero bedo ki winy. 	Therefore since it still remains for some to enter that rest, and since those who formerly had the good news proclaimed to them did not go in because of their disobedience,
ocitto ka wil i cuk 	she went to buy things from the market 
ka ce ŋat mo neko dano ki pala lucwan, en bene myero gineke woko ki pala lucwan. Meno aye ka ma jo pa Lubaŋa myero gunyut iye kit ma giciro kwede can ki niyegi. 	If anyone is to be killed with the sword, with the sword they will be killed.” This calls for patient endurance and faithfulness on the part of God’s people.
Macalo yam doŋ wuye Rwot Yecu Kricito, myero bene wubed i en. 	For though I am absent from you in body, I am present with you in spirit and delight to see how disciplined you are and how firm your faith in Christ is.
Mumiyo to tye ka tic i komwa, ento kwo tye ka tic i komwu. 	For we who are alive are always being given over to death for Jesus’ sake, so that his life may also be revealed in our mortal body.
joo Japan tye ka monynyo joo Caina  	the Japanese are attacking the Chinese
tye ka bkido bogine ka dongelwokgi 	he is soaking his clothes in water so that he may wash them
ma wot dong oloyo woko ni, iteer gang	take home that old man there, in your motor car, who is now unable or failed to walk 
imulu wang ngu labutu	you touch the face of a lion which is lying down dying
gob rangi makwaar ki ma ocwak ocwak 	alternate the red with the yellow colours 
bin cok kany 	come near here 
ngee tee lokke maber 	understand or know the meaning of the words well
lwango cammo doki bollo tongge i gin ma otop keken 	the fly eats and lays its eggs on rotten things only 
lok meno dong myerro me awinynya ki tee tok 	such talks are better to be heard from behind
i dong oro gipitto layata omugi i juro kulo 	during the beginning of the dry season, sweet potatoes are planted in the wet river bank
rye nwenggo yat mada 	he knows how to climb the trees very well
Lupwony-cik ki ajwagi madito pa Lubaŋa gumito make i cawa-nu, ento gulworo lwak	The teachers of the law and the chief priests looked for a way to arrest him immediately, because they knew he had spoken this parable against them
Pe aneno ot mo me woro Lubaŋa i gaŋ meno, pien ot me woro Lubaŋa ki kunnu en aye Rwot Lubaŋa Won Twer Ducu kikome, ki Latin romo. 	I did not see a temple in the city, because the Lord God Almighty and the Lamb are its temple.
gunno lumabuc mape wacce . 	they tortured the prisoners very much
I kare ma lupwonnye guo loka tuŋcel, onoŋo wigi owil woko me tero mugati mo. 	When they went across the lake, the disciples forgot to take bread.
ka wumitto conynye ci as wunu ki kany woko 	if you like to abuse each other, get away from here 
Ka oryeyo bade yo tuŋ bot lupwonnyene, ci owaco botgi ni, “Wunen, maa ki omegina aye jo ma tye kany!	He replied to him, “Who is my mother, and who are my brothers?”
Wukwa romi pa Lubaŋa ma tye botwu, kun wunenogi maber, pe pi dic, ento pi mitiwu kenwu, i kit ma Lubaŋa mito, pe pi lim, ento pi mit me cwinywu. 	To the elders among you, I appeal as a fellow elder and a witness of Christ’s sufferings who also will share in the glory to be revealed:
Apwoyo Lubaŋa mada pien an gira yam pe abatija dano mo i kinwu, kono abatija Kricipo ki Gayo keken, 	I thank God that I did not baptize any of you except Crispus and Gaius,
odok tunggi 	he returned to their home
kel ki wan bene 	bring for us also 
pokko gin man pe tek	to divide this thing is not difficult 
lee mokko i obwoo ka gicikko maber 	the animals get caught in the net when it is well set 
gam donggi wek ginen lakki 	open your mouth so that your teeth can be examined
Pe ijuk ladit mo, ento cuk cwinye macalo woru	Do everything you can to help Zenas the lawyer and Apollos on their way and see that they have everything they need.
winyo matye ka tuk bene pimme ka i pimmo maber 	even flying birds can be aimed at if you do it well
kotte tye ka cweer ki pee  	it is raining with hailstones
pe i tub dano ma gitye ka mat pien gitwerro goyi woko 	do not disturb or provoke the people who are drinking because they can beat you
lakwena pa gabumente me Jeremel tye kany 	the German ambassador is here
Ka piny doŋ oyuto ci obino ki jone apar wiye aryo. 	When evening came, Jesus arrived with the Twelve.
cak gerro ot	start building the house
Lwak jo mapol ma guye gumedde bot Rwot, co wa ki mon, 	Nevertheless, more and more men and women believed in the Lord and were added to their number.
Ento i kare ma ajwagi madito pa Lubaŋa ki ludoŋo gudote, en pe ogamo iye gin mo. 	Meanwhile Jesus stood before the governor, and the governor asked him, “Are you the king of the Jews?” “You have said so,” Jesus replied.
wek aribbe bene kacel kwede. Pe atye ki kit ma atir ma mera kikoma, kadi ki mo ma bino pi lubo cik bene pe, ento amito abed ki kit ma atir ma ginoŋo pi ye Kricito, ma oa ki bot Lubaŋa kikome, dok ma en omiyo pi niye. 	I consider them garbage, that I may gain Christ
dyegi abicel keken aye gitye	only six goats are present
nywang layatane maber ka dong igul iye ka dong igwee kwedde ki dek	mash the potatoes well in your hand and make it into a form of a spoon and then scoop the sauce with it
Lakwor ma gibityeko woko me agikki en aye to. 	The last enemy to be destroyed is death.
ka gipenynyi ling ni tik pe ilok lok mo 	when you are asked keep completely silent, do not say anything 
pul ka gioddo i pany maber ci git dokko ma yom twatwal 	when the groundnuts have been pounded well in a mortar, it becomes soft like pulp 
dakone caar, mokone nino ducu ma en oreggo beddo agaka 	the woman is careless or useless, the flour ground by lies is always coarse 
Ka Cimon oneno ni gulimo Cwiny Maleŋ pi keto bad pa lukwena, ci okelo lim botgi 	When Simon saw that the Spirit was given at the laying on of the apostles’ hands, he offered them money
Jo ducu ma gibedo i Lida ki Caron gunene, ci gulokke bot Rwot. 	All those who lived in Lydda and Sharon saw him and turned to the Lord.
yanggo pe gin ma gitiyo aruya 	operation is not the thing that you do hurriedly
Ento Yecu odok iye ni, “Yam gicoyo ni, ‘Dano pe bibedo kwo ki kwon keken, ento bedo kwo ki lok ducu ma a ki i dog Lubaŋa.’ ” 	Jesus answered, “It is written: ‘Man shall not live on bread alone, but on every word that comes from the mouth of God.’”
Kit meno bene wac ki mon madito ni gin myero gubed ki woro i kit bedogi ducu, pe gucok dog jo mukene, pe gubed jo ma doŋ gudoko opii pa koŋo. Myero gubed jo ma pwonyo gin maber, 	Teach the older men to be temperate, worthy of respect, self-controlled, and sound in faith, in love and in endurance.
ojwayo wii meja maleng mada 	he polished the top of the table very well indeed 
lanyodo pa Ocan 	parent of Ocan or Ocan's parent 
wek giŋol kop oloo jo ma pe ye lok me ada, ento cwinygi yom i timo gin ma pe tye atir. 	and so that all will be condemned who have not believed the truth but have delighted in wickedness.
gwang lokke woko 	give a confused statement
puyo kom ot 	plastering the house or to decorate decorating the house 
gony ogwil woko ki gut dyel pien tyek deyone 	loosen the rope from the goat's neck because it is strangling it 
guur nyuka ki litino 	stir millet flour mixed in water while boiling to make gruel for the children 
Jo ma gucuŋ ka ŋete guwacci, “In iyeto ajwaka madit pa Lubaŋa?” 	Those who were standing near Paul said, “How dare you insult God’s high priest!”
wa as ka nekko atunya ma ononggo omakko dyang 	we came from killing the lion that had attacked a cow 
nyom gat ma cwinynyi maarro adada pe pi ber me komme, ci ibeddo ki yom cwiny anyim i nyom mewu 	marry someone whom you really love, not for her beauty and you will be happy in future in your marriage
Kit ma ma ginywalowa kwede bene pe pwonyowu ni, ka laco oloto yer wiye odoŋo maboco, ci miyo ginyware? 	Does not the very nature of things teach you that if a man has long hair, it is a disgrace to him,
pokko cam ki dano	to distribute food to the people
Pien Jon yam obino ma pe camo cam, dok bene onoŋo pe mato gin mo, mumiyo guwacci, “Dano-nu tye ki cen marac.” 	For John came neither eating nor drinking, and they say, ‘He has a demon.’
Ka ce wutye ka lega i nyim Lubaŋa, ka onoŋo wutye ki kop mo i kom dano mo, ci wutimme kica, ka wek Wonwu ma tye i polo bene otimwu kica i kom balwu. [ 	And when you stand praying, if you hold anything against anyone, forgive them, so that your Father in heaven may forgive you your sins.”
wec me bal i kom dano mukene mape en aye ma oballo gin marac mada 	imputing the fault to a man who has not faulted is very bad 
I kare meno Yecu owoto kun ŋolo ki i poto i ceŋ cabit. Lupwonnyene gurito wit bel, gutinyo i ciŋgi, gumwodo. 	One Sabbath Jesus was going through the grainfields, and his disciples began to pick some heads of grain, rub them in their hands and eat the kernels.
Yecu owaco botgi ni, “Wun ducu wubitenya woko kena, pien yam gicoyo ni, ‘Abigoyo lakwat, ci romi gibiket woko ata.’ 	“You will all fall away,” Jesus told them, “for it is written: “‘I will strike the shepherd, and the sheep will be scattered.’
yub lokki maber 	prepare well your words or speech 
litino gimaarro oduu lyata mada kaddi bed pud guaa kacam ducu put gicitto ka mwodone pien Bin 	children like very much the poorly developed sweet potatoes, even after meal they still go to eat them
nak gicweyo male i kom ot ki i wii tuk keno pieno lye ka orii ci peg ki latuk 	the cupboard is usually built on the wall above the fireplace and gets full of soot
jalle ka dong tye ka yuggo lok, wiye dong wil woko ikom tic matye ka tiyone 	when the fellow is entertaining people with his humour, he forgets about his own work
yer waar ma imitto 	select or choose the shoes you want select 
Rwot myero omi en ono? kica ma a bote i Nino maca. Dok in bene iŋeyo maber mada kit kony ma en obedo ka miyone i Epeco.	On the contrary, when he was in Rome, he searched hard for me until he found me.
Yecu odokkigi iye ni, “Adada awacciwu ni, dano ducu ma timo bal, en opii me bal. 	How can you say that we shall be set free?”
Doŋ tye gin adek ma gibedo matwal: niye, gen, mar	And now these three remain: faith, hope and love
gimakke pi yacco nyaa pa Otoo 	he was arrested for impregnating Otoo's daughter 
yik gwok ma otoo ni 	bury the dead dog
Lacen aneno lee ca ki luker me lobo guywayo monygi me lweny i kom ŋat ma obedo i wi aguragura kacel ki monnye. 	Then I saw the beast and the kings of the earth and their armies gathered together to wage war against the rider on the horse and his army.
Ka oa odwogo bot lupwonnye openyogi ni, “Wun pud wunino ce? Pud wutye ka yweyo bo? Nen, cawa doŋ onyiko cok, Wod pa dano doŋ gimiyo woko i ciŋ lubalo. 	Then he returned to the disciples and said to them, “Are you still sleeping and resting? Look, the hour has come, and the Son of Man is delivered into the hands of sinners.
jo mukene ni, “Pe, ento cal kwede acala.” En ogamo ni, “An ennu, do!” 	Some claimed that he was
dano ma ngene	a well known person 
gwido lok ni put put	talking persistently 
Gimito bedo lupwony-cik, kun pe giniaŋ kadi wa lok ma giloko, nyo kadi gin ma gitye ka lok i kome, ma gucuŋ iye matek twatwal-li. 	Some have departed from these and have turned to meaningless talk.
pur poto maber 	cultivate the field well 
Dok obolo botgi carolok mukene kun wacci, “Ker me polo rom ki dano mo ma ocoyo kodi mabeco i potone. 	Jesus told them another parable: “The kingdom of heaven is like a man who sowed good seed in his field.
Apwoyowu pien i lok ducu wupo pira, kun wumako pwonnya ma yam akelo botwu. 	I praise you for remembering me in everything and for holding to the traditions just as I passed them on to you.
um latin man tikko pug ki ogodo keken kadi gilwok maleng 	the child's nose is always full of hard crusts of mucus even if it is washed clean
en aye winyo ma tow kor yat ci rokko maber doko odde 	woodpecker is a bird which digs the tree and makes it its house
dano acel acel myerro obed ki dero monone ma kano iye kal monone 	every person must have a granary where he keeps his reserve millet for hard times
maarro wekko woko ka ticce nyo ginne tek	loves to leave if the work or the thing is difficult
Ŋat acel acel i kinwa myero oyom cwiny dano lawote, me konye, wek odoŋ i niyene. 	We who are strong ought to bear with the failings of the weak and not to please ourselves.
kweyo obakke ni pim kuno ma kadi lorry abic bene jubbo kwee pe tum 	there is a large quantity of sand there, even five lorries cannot carry and finish the sand
cir lokke pe iwek kiniga omakki iye  	tolerate his words do not get annoyed by it
Orwone wao i Cidon, ci Julio otimo Paulo maber mada, oyene me wot ka limo lureme wek gugwoke. 	The next day we landed at Sidon; and Julius, in kindness to Paul, allowed him to go to his friends so they might provide for his needs.
yatti twero yegge 	this tree can be shaken 
temmo kwan matek 	trying to read very hard
Apwoyo Lubaŋa pi Yecu Kricito Rwotwa! Doŋ an kikoma aworo cik pa Lubaŋa ki tamma, kun i koma ma ginywala kwede aworo cik me bal.	What a wretched man I am! Who will rescue me from this body that is subject to death?
talli twerro ngunne 	this pole can be cut 
par pi jami mabecco macon ma yang itimmo en aye ber 	reflection on the good things that you dki in the past, is better
pid matek pi jamini ma giyakkoni 	plead seriously to the court for your things which were looted
Oreto luker ki i wi komkergi omiyo dito bot lucan. 	He has brought down rulers from their thrones but has lifted up the humble.
goyo tanga i wii lee i nyim abila	to sprinkle water mixed with flour on the head of a beast in front of the shrine  
awobe gubinno kany ma gurukko odyeer keken ka myello myel Bwola 	the boys came here all dressed only in pieces of leather behind their backs for dancing Bwola
Oketa ma naka yang pud tye labot 	since long time ago Oketa is still a bachelor 
guyubbe tin mada me citto ka nyatto lyec ki tong	they have prepared themselves today to go tomorrow to spear the elephants many times
Ka doŋ gudonyo i yeya, ci yamo ocako pye mot. 	But when he saw the wind, he was afraid and, beginning to sink, cried out, “Lord, save me!”
Ento guwacci, “Pe i nino madit, miyo lwak bitugge.” 	“But not during the festival,” they said, “or there may be a riot among the people.”
ŋat mo ma timo bal noŋo pe onene, dok bene noŋo pe oŋeye. 	No one who continues to sin has either seen him or known him.
tiyo tic matek yonggo kom dano	hard work weakens the body
en olokko too 	he spoke even when he was prevented
pii twerro yoye mabe itee aturre magi 	the water can be sprinkled very well under these flowers
latin myerro wooro woonne ki minne 	the child should respect his father and mother 
Ŋat ma pe ki mar, noŋo en pe ŋeyo Lubaŋa, pien Lubaŋa aye mar. 	Whoever does not love does not know God, because God is love.
taa ka icakko mattone, mee manok nok nio ka lacen dong imokko iye mape itwerro wekkone 	when you start smoking tobacco, it gradually increases little by little until ultimately you find that you cannot leave it but stuck to it, in other words, you become addicted to it
Ka ma en odonyo iye-ni, en aye wupeny iye won ot ni, ‘Lapwony owacci, ot welo ma atiro iye tye kwene, ka ma abicamo iye cam me Kato, kacel ki lupwonnyena?’ 	Say to the owner of the house he enters, ‘The Teacher asks: Where is my guest room, where I may eat the Passover with my disciples?’
Ento Maliam okano lok magi ducu, kun tamo ki i cwinye. 	But Mary treasured up all these things and pondered them in her heart.
Okot timmo abwol lak lyec mabecco mada	Okot is an expert in making very nice wristlet from the elephant tusksOkot is an expert in making very nice wristlet from the elephant tusks
pe amitto nenno ngat matye ki matata kany 	I do not want to see a trouble maker here 
man en aye dwee me aboro	this is the eigth month
I kare ma Jekaria tye ka tiyo tic me ajwaka i nyim Lubaŋa, i kare me waŋ ticce, 	Once when Zechariah’s division was on duty and he was serving as priest before God,
Gin gulegowa lok acel keken ni myero wapo pi lucan, ma man aye onoŋo gin ma aketo cwinya ni myero atim. 	For God, who was at work in Peter as an apostle to the circumcised, was also at work in me as an apostle to the Gentiles.
kit ma yam Epapira opwonyowu kwede, ma en latic wadiwa ma wamaro. En latic pa Kricito piwa ma genne. 	the faith and love that spring from the hope stored up for you in heaven and about which you have already heard in the true message of the gospel
Petero dok openye ni, “Rwot, piŋo pe atwero lubi koni? Abimiyo kwona piri.” 	Simon Peter asked him, “Lord, where are you going?” Jesus replied, “Where I am going, you cannot follow now, but you will follow later.”
pwoyo tic ma en otiyo 	thanking for the good work that he did
joo ma matto kongo oda, gin aye joo ma noggo gumatto, ci gumeer gubutto i teer kongone, gin aye orwroone dok gimatto 	the people who do drink the leftover beer, are the ones who drank and became intoxicated and slept over it there, are the ones again to drink the leftover beer the following day
nyuka ma rep en aye ber me amatta 	thin porridge is better for drinking 
kun wacci, “Wuŋuti, pien ker me polo doŋ onyiko cok.” 	In those days John the Baptist came, preaching in the wilderness of Judea
Pe wuwek lukworwu gumiwu lworo i gin mo. Man aye lanyut ma cimo botgi ka maleŋ ni gibirwenyo woko matwal, ento lanyut man nyuto botwu ni gibilarowu	so that through my being with you again your boasting in Christ Jesus will abound on account of me.
Latowaŋ odaŋŋe ni, “Yecu Lakwar Daudi, tima kica ba!” 	He called out, “Jesus, Son of David, have mercy on me!”
dano gucokke ni nim i tee kanica	a large number of people assembled in the church
guul tin ki cam mada ma joo mukene dong gucakko kokko igi ni lit 	move all the cotton on the floor to one skie in order to leave room for the sitting of the people
Jon owaco bot Yecu ni, “Lapwony, waneno ŋatti mo ka tye ka ryemo cen ki nyiŋi, ma en pe nywako wot kwedwa, ci wajuke woko.” 	“Teacher,” said John, “we saw someone driving out demons in your name and we told him to stop, because he was not one of us.”
nyukane pek pe matte 	the porridge is too thick, it cannot be drunk
kom lagwar obeddo opilo-pilo 	the zebra's body is striped 
noggo but bongo mogo ma oyec me acomma tek mada	finding pieces of torn clothes for loin dressing is very difficult
yab cura adek me jiri pa Matayo 	open the third chapter of the gospel of St Matthew
litino gimaarro cammo pwomo mada	children love very much to eat passion fruits
madara wangga tye kwne me nenno piny?  	where is my spectacles?
piny ockido ni mwut 	it is quite dark 
En odok iye ni, “An a dwan ŋat ma daŋŋe i tim ni, ‘Wutir yo pa Rwot ocuŋ atir,’ macalo lanebi Icaya owaco.” 	They asked him, “Then who are you? Are you Elijah?” He said, “I am not.” “Are you the Prophet?” He answered, “No.”
lak palaa man twerro pakke maber mada 	the edge of this knife can be sharpened very well
Ento gin magi ducu doŋ otimme, wek lok ma yam gicoyo i buk pa lunebi ocobbe kakare.” I kare meno cut lupwonnye gubwote guriŋo woko. 	But this has all taken place that the writings of the prophets might be fulfilled.” Then all the disciples deserted him and fled.
tyen meja ma en wido nen maber mada 	the legs of the table which he does reduce in sizes look very nice
I kare me cer ki i kin jo muto, dako-nu doŋ bibedo dako pa aŋa? Pien gin co abiro-ni ducu gubedo kwede.” 	At the resurrection whose wife will she be, since the seven were married to her?”
lukiko beddo i nino me abic keken 	the court sits only on Friday 
Ŋat ma oa bot Lubaŋa winyo lok pa Lubaŋa	Can any of you prove me guilty of sin? If I am telling the truth, why don’t you believe me?
Yecu dok owaco botgi ni, “Pi meno lapwony-cik mo ma gipwonyo pi ker me polo rom ki dano mo ma won ot, ma kwanyo gin manyen ki macon ki i kom lonyone.” 	He said to them, “Therefore every teacher of the law who has become a disciple in the kingdom of heaven is like the owner of a house who brings out of his storeroom new treasures as well as old.”
tiki tiki ni tye kwene me donynyo me nenno tuko? 	where is your ticket for entering to see the play?  
Lujudaya ma kunnu onoŋo yam gin jo ma kitgi beco makato jo ma i Tecalonika. Gujolo lok ma gitito botgi ki ciŋgi aryo, kun giŋiyo ginacoya ma yam gicoyo nino ducu pi neno ka lok ducu tye kit meno ada. 	Now the Berean Jews were of more noble character than those in Thessalonica, for they received the message with great eagerness and examined the Scriptures every day to see if what Paul said was true.
moo man gimiyo ki lutwo me cado 	castor oil comes from the tree ricinus communis it used to be given to the patient to induce diarrhoea
won lacolla nyo lacollo obin ocol dako pa Onen ma dong cok ka nywal 	go and call a midwife to help Onen's wife who is about to deliver 
ocitto ka tucce i ot yat 	he went to have an injection in the hospital
gwok nyo bibino diki 	perhaps he might come tomorrow
ogut woko i ot	he is hiding in the house 
Makato ducu pien in iŋeyo maber twatwal kit pa Lujudaya ducu ki lok ma gilaro i kingi kengi	and especially so because you are well acquainted with all the Jewish customs and controversies
gubeddo ka nywanne ki lokke labongo nonggo teere 	they got entangled with the case without finding out the solution
Pi meno ka won poto olok obino, bitimo lupur niŋniŋ?” 	So they took him and threw him out of the vineyard and killed him.
anyogi ma odong i poto pud rommo bekke 	the maize remaining in the field can still be picked
Doŋ kit macalo gin pe guneno gin mo ma konyogi i ŋeyo Lubaŋa-ni, Lubaŋa bene otenyogi woko i tamgi ma konnye pe, wek doŋ gutim gin ma pe myero. 	Therefore God gave them over in the sinful desires of their hearts to sexual impurity for the degrading of their bodies with one another.
Kwer boko lok ma pe me woro Lubaŋa, pien lok ma kit meno medde ki rwenyo dano arwenya i woro Lubaŋa, 	Do your best to present yourself to God as one approved, a worker who does not need to be ashamed and who correctly handles the word of truth.
mac mitto dok amedda ka wek oted cam oyot oyot 	the fire needs to be increased in order to cook the food quickly
lacoo ma orukko cuti ma obeddo lamir lamir en aye Lawoko 	the man who is wearing the dark brown suit is Lawoko
akic en aye ringo ma yom mada ma dano ducu gimaaro	the loin meat that is sirloin and fillet meat are very soft and tasty,which all the people like
Odoko bene, “Got ma miyo dano yokke ka giwoto, ariya ma miyo dano poto.” Giyokke pien gukwero winyo lok pa Lubaŋa, macalo onoŋo yam giyubo pigi wa con. 	But to those who do not believe, “The stone the builders rejected has become the cornerstone,”
nyebbe ki lwii ki i cukul	to get used to escaping from the school
Ci jo ma gutelo yo ki jo ma gulubo kore gudaŋŋe ni, “Ojana, wupak Lakwar Daudi! Lubaŋa omi gum i kom ŋat ma bino i nyiŋ Rwot! Ojana malo i wi polo!” 	A very large crowd spread their cloaks on the road, while others cut branches from the trees and spread them on the road.
Yam tye ki laminne nyiŋe Maliam ma obedo ka tyen Yecu kun winyo lokke. 	She had a sister called Mary, who sat at the Lord’s feet listening to what he said.
Kadi aloko leb pa dano ki pa lumalaika, ka pe atye ki mar, abedo calo olaŋ ma kok, gara ma wo awoya. 	If I speak in the tongues of men or of angels, but do not have love, I am only a resounding gong or a clanging cymbal.
dok dano ducu bikwerowu pira. Ento ŋat ma ciro kun diyo cwinye nio i agikki bilarre. 	You will be hated by everyone because of me, but the one who stands firm to the end will be saved.
obinno i kinne me caa abic me dye ceng	he came at about the fifth hour of the day
Obino i gaŋ mo me Camaria ma nyiŋe Cukar, cok ki poto ma Yakobo yam omiyo bot wode Yucepu. 	Now he had to go through Samaria.
Pi meno, wuleg Won poto wek ocwal lutic ka kayo kacce.”	Then he said to his disciples, “The harvest is plentiful but the workers are few.
man en aye kare me coyo kodi 	this is the time for sowing seeds 
An Jon, ominwu ma oribbe kwedwu i can ki i ker ki i diyo cwiny me ciro can ma wabedo kwede i Yecu. Onoŋo atye i cula ma gilwoŋo ni Patimo, pien onoŋo atito lok ma Lubaŋa oloko, ki lok me caden ma Yecu omiyo. 	I, John, your brother and companion in the suffering and kingdom and patient endurance that are ours in Jesus, was on the island of Patmos because of the word of God and the testimony of Jesus.
Luparicayo gupenye ni, “Piŋo lupwonnyeni gitiyo gin ma cik okwero ni pe giti i ceŋ cabit?” 	The Pharisees said to him, “Look, why are they doing what is unlawful on the Sabbath?”
gijwatte tin odo able pi lweny ki luwotte  	he was caned five strokes for fighting with his companions
Macalo Won makwo ceŋ oora, kun an abedo kwo pi Won kit meno ŋat ma cama bikwo pira. 	Whoever eats my flesh and drinks my blood remains in me, and I in them.
Man en aye cuma me motoka ma miyo motoka ringgo 	this is the engine of the car which makes it run 
tic pa acikari en aye me lweny ki lurok ma gukello lweny i kom lobo meggi pe me makko dano ma gang, pien eno tic pa acekere	the work of the soldiers is to fight the enemies who have attacked the country but not to arrest the civilians because that is the work of the policemen
litino gitye ka jakko jang muyembe woko 	the children are tearing off the branches of the mango
Ka Yecu doŋ otyeko lokke ducu kun dano giwinyo, ci odonyo i Kapernaum. 	When Jesus had finished saying all this to the people who were listening, he entered Capernaum.
pai pai lim mada pi meno litino gimaarro cammo ne mada 	papaya is very sweet, therefore the children like to eat it very much
gimitti kany ento in inyedde meeri tegge kwica 	you are wanted here but you are sitting aloot there without caring 
mon giwacci kayo kal ki alwette dok yot nikatto me kayo ki palaa 	the women say that harvesting millet with finger nail knife Is quicker than with ordinary knife
pud tye ka rubbo i nyuka wek okwee ka dong gimatti 	still stirring the gruel to make it cold so that it may be taken
bongo um tye kwene?  	where is the cloth for covering?
mak man pi tutuno 	hold this for the moment 
man dano ma lalarra mada, larro jami ma pe meere 	this is a man who always disputes about things, he disputes the ownership of things which are not 
kel obayo me moyo kal i ceng 	bring the large papyrus mat for putting the millet on, to dry in the sun
pirra nino ducu kello pekko ki lapiira 	conspiring always brings trouble on the conspirator
Wubed dok wuti ticwu ki ryeko twatwal i nyim jo ma pe guye Yecu, kun wutiyo ki kare ma tye bene i yo maber. 	Pray that I may proclaim it clearly, as I should.
jwerro ngwec mada i tukko me ngwec 	he runs very fast in athletic championship
cura yabbo yoo melee me ngeyo cayanci 	mathematics opens wide the knowledge of science
ocitto ka coyo geya 	he went to sow sorghum
dano ma cenggo lokgi dwog mada, telokke ni gin luyella mada 	the cloth is short and does not fit the girl 
ci olwoŋo ladit ma loyo askari, openye ka ce doŋ oto woko. 	Summoning the centurion, he asked him if Jesus had already died.
opego jukko komme ki daba 	the pig takes a bath in the mud
ka owinynyo ni gimmitto makke ci ocitto i ot ci oguny rye kuno 	when he heard that he was to be arrested, he went into the house and hide himself there
latinne komme yil mada 	the child is restless and troublesome
piyo latin ni ongoo lawotte	persuading the child to beat his friend
ento kapten Licia obino omaye woko ki i ciŋwa tektek, 	But the commander Lysias came and took him from us with much violence,
Ka dok Yecu owaco bot dako-nu ni, “In dako-ni niyeni dit. Myero obed boti kit macalo imito.” Ci nyare otugi caŋ woko cut i cawa meno. 	He replied, “It is not right to take the children’s bread and toss it to the dogs.”
otira macon pe dong twerro pwonynye 	a very old person cannot be taught 
bongo makwar maryeny ni rag ran 	a red dress that shines brightly
awobe ojwaar i gang ma gibecco mada me odilo abolla ki cig 	we have very fine tall boys in the home here who are very suitable for basketball
Ento lok man ni, “Yam gikwane” onoŋo pe gicoyo pi en kene, 	This is why “it was credited to him as righteousness.”
Lamalaika me aryone oonyo gin ma ii atabone woko i nam, ci olokke odoko calo remo pa dano muto, ki gin makwo ducu ma onoŋo gitye i nam guto woko. 	The second angel poured out his bowl on the sea, and it turned into blood like that of a dead person, and every living thing in the sea died.
citto ka rokko ngati i dog ticce pe ber 	to go to disturb somebody at his work is not good
yoo me citto i Amerika dong cok ka cengge woko 	the box door can be shut 
lalelee omukko but ot woko 	the rivulets rain has washed away the side of the hut
Medo ki meno, yubba kicika me buto pa welo, pien atye ki gen ni legawu biweko gimiya botwu. 	Confident of your obedience, I write to you, knowing that you will do even more than I ask.
Wapwoyo Lubaŋa Won Rwotwa Yecu Kricito kare ducu ma walego piwu, 	To God’s holy people in Colossae, the faithful brothers and sisters in Christ: Grace and peace to you from God our Father.
rub i dek ngoorre ka dong itokki 	stir the cowpeas sauce and then dish out
eno tika meeri 	is it yours i is it truely yours? is it really yours?
Ka doŋ gunyiko cok ki Jeriko, latowaŋ mo onoŋo obedo piny i ŋet yo kun lego lim. 	As Jesus approached Jericho, a blind man was sitting by the roadside begging.
gucitto ka rikko ot manyen pien dong gimitto puyone 	they went to fill up the gaps between the poles with small ones in the new house because they want to plaster it rim 
gangge dok tye oyutte yutte ki Kampala 	his home is some distance from Kampala
ocwee ma obedo ni met 	so big and looks like heaps of fat 
oluro cammo bwino ki papai mada 	the mouse birds do like to eat very much mulberry tree fruits and pawpaw
Kricito doŋ otyeko gonyowa woko ki i pii wek wabed jo me kuc ma walone kenwa. Wacuŋ doŋ matek	who, by the power that enables him to bring everything under his control, will transform our lowly bodies so that they will be like his glorious body.
akwerro ni pe an ma atimmo	I denied that it was I who did it
en tye ki mit madowong twatwal me jami 	he has excessive desire for things 
Yecu dok owaco ki gin ni, “Adada awacciwu ni, an a doggola me romi. 	Jesus used this figure of speech, but the Pharisees did not understand what he was telling them.
lye opikke 	he has a big abdomen
acommo ni gek ki Opoka acomma i kare ma atye ka wot i London	I unexpectantly met Opoka in London when I was walking about
Lupwony-cik ma gua i Jerucalem guwaco ni, “En tye ki jok Beeljebul,” dok ni, “En ryemo cen pi twero pa ladit pa cen.” 	And the teachers of the law who came down from Jerusalem said, “He is possessed by Beelzebul! By the prince of demons he is driving out demons.”
En dok ocwalo lutic mukene mapol, ma gikato jo mukwoŋo ca, jo-nu bene gitimogi ki kit tim acel ma gitimo i kom lutic mukwoŋo ca. 	“The tenants seized his servants; they beat one, killed another, and stoned a third.
yer gweg matye i nyim man 	pick out stones which are in this simsim
ajut pa meni	your mothers' stupidity 
pii litino ka lweny 	incite the children to fight 
lacoone laper lok mada  	the man talks too much
wii latinni pe twerro lyelle 	the child's hair cannot be shaved 
pokko cam ki dano 	distributing food to the people
Ka luwote ki wadine guwinyo ni Rwot onyuto kicane madwoŋ i kome kuman, cwinygi obedo yom kacel kwede. 	Her neighbors and relatives heard that the Lord had shown her great mercy, and they shared her joy.
Cimon ma en ocako nyiŋe ni Petero, ki Anderiya ominne, Yakobo ki Jon, Pilipo ki Bartolomayo, 	Simon (whom he named Peter), his brother Andrew, James, John, Philip, Bartholomew,
pammo lobo i kom ot	to plaster the house with the clay house can be well plastered
ento Yecu bedo i dog ticce me ajwaka matwal, pien en bedo nakanaka. 	but because Jesus lives forever, he has a permanent priesthood.
Ento wun wuwaco ni, ‘Ka dano mo owaco bot wonne nyo bot minne ni, Gin ma kono akonyi kwede doŋ amiyo woko bot Lubaŋa, en pe myero owor wonne.’ 	For God said, ‘Honor your father and mother’ and ‘Anyone who curses their father or mother is to be put to death.’
kelle odoo me goyo gwok  	bring for him a stick for beating the dog 
jer komme kwica 	move the chair there
pe ber me nino ducu me beddo ka jenynye me mitto Iweny 	it is not good always to be furious and wanting to fight 
Ka lwak gitye ka kuro, kun gipennye ki i cwinygi pi Jon, ka kono en Kricito ma Lubaŋa oyero, 	The people were waiting expectantly and were all wondering in their hearts if John might possibly be the Messiah.
geg dyel myerro giwang woko 	the meat from a sick goat should be burnt
Ci dako-nu cut onywalo latin awobi, en ŋat ma biloyo rok ducu ki odoo nyonyo. Ento latin meno gigamo woko, gitero bot Lubaŋa ki i komkerre. 	She gave birth to a son, a male child, who “will rule all the nations with an iron scepter.” And her child was snatched up to God and to his throne.
latin myero owiny juk	the child must obey  restraining 
litino cukul gitye ka pwonynyo kutto lure 	the school children are learning how to blow lure
obeddo okarre i doggolane 	he sat with his legs astride at his door 
Ka guwinyo lok magi, jo mogo i kin lwak guwaco ni, “Adada, nye man en lanebi meno.” 	Up to that time the Spirit had not been given, since Jesus had not yet been glorified.
obayo lee ki tong ci tong okatto abwob ki gette pe ocubbo	he threw the spear at the animal and the spear did not hit it but it passed round by the side of the animal 
pura en aye lee ma komme obok makwar 	hartebeest is the animal which its body is reddish brown all over it lives in large numbers
wot nonno labongo mac tara pe tweerre pien piny col ni mwut 	walking without a lamp is impossible because it is too dark
joo ma guporre 	the holy people, saints 
Wun jo ma wumito ni cik olowu, wun pe wuwinyo cik? Koŋ doŋ wutitta mono. 	how I wish I could be with you now and change my tone, because I am perplexed about you!
en aye mumiyo lakit teko macalo meno tye ka tic i kome.” 	Some were saying, “John the Baptist has been raised from the dead, and that is why miraculous powers are at work in him.”
dano guyimme mada i bar odilo 	people gathered themselves in a large number in the football field
Akot dong apoya omakko woko 	Akot has become mad now
Ka wuŋeyo lok man, ci wubibedo ki yomcwiny ka wutiyogi. 	Very truly I tell you, no servant is greater than his master, nor is a messenger greater than the one who sent him.
ento pud amedde ki waco botwu ni, kadi bed Solomon orukke ki deyone ducu, ento pe orukke macalo mo acel i kingi. 	They do not labor or spin.
gwok ka tukko ki dano bene pe kayo dano matek ento bammo abamma 	the dogs also when playing with the people, do not bite hard but lightly 
jun myerro gilyello ki lyedi mabit wek pe oony  	the chin should he shaved with a sharp razor in order to prevent formation of pimples
danone ryek mada ki kwoo me kwallo jamb pieno pe twerro makke 	the man is very clever in stealing things, therefore, he cannot be caught
gin gigeene 	they know each other 
Pi man, en myero otyer gitum pi balle en kikome, kacel ki pi bal pa lwak.	This is why he has to offer sacrifices for his own sins, as well as for the sins of the people.
obillo dekke ci ononggoni kado kec iye mada 	she tasted the sauce and found that there was too much salt in it
latin aweno pe dongo ikin gweno	a guineal fowl chick be reared among chicken chicks
gad me cam kello cweyo ma miyo pekko me remo medde mada 	eating excessively brings fatness which in turn raises up blood pressure
nong kong waraga me peny meeri ka dong ibin 	get your examination certificate and then come
Olwoŋe, openye ni, ‘Lok aŋo mono ma awinyo i komi-ni? Kella wel jami ma ikano, pien pe dok itwero bedo lagwok-jami.’ 	Jesus told his disciples: “There was a rich man whose manager was accused of wasting his possessions.
yetto teke me gurro laa 	cutting and shaping the small woods to a point as wooden nails for nailing down a hide 
yam warwenyo woko ata, wabedo opii pa mitiwa ki jami mapatpat ma yomo cwinywa. Wabalo karewa i raccwiny ki mone, dano gukwerowa, ki wan onoŋo wadagge kekenwa. 	At one time we too were foolish, disobedient, deceived and enslaved by all kinds of passions and pleasures
weggi jami man tye kwene? 	where are the owners of these things? 
lul gum lobo ogol yoo wek ogeng dano ringgo matek ki motoka i yoo meno 	make a heap of earth across the road to prevent the people from running fast with their cars on that road
yang con anyira giputto aputta yer i kom murgi, pe gilyello alyella pien lyedi ononggo pekke 	long time ago the girls used to pull out pubic hair because there were no razors 
Ka lutic wadigi guneno gin ma otimme-ni, ci cwinygi ocwer matek twatwal, gucito gutito gin ducu ma otimme bot laditgi. 	When the other servants saw what had happened, they were outraged and went and told their master everything that had happened.
bonyo gucorre i poto ci gucammo kal woko 	the locusts came in a large swarm and ate all the millet
latin dong beddo kere akera i paco kuno	the child lives subdued and submissively in that home
Ento wun, Ŋat Maleŋ doŋ owirowu woko ki moo, wun ducu doŋ wutye ki ŋec. 	But you have an anointing from the Holy One, and all of you know the truth.
wuwinye.” 	Listen to him!”
bao ma otwoo maber en aye ber me apaya imeja 	a well dried wood is the one that is good for making tables 
Jo ma yam gimol gikato ki ka ŋete gubedo ka yete, kun giyeŋo wigi, ma giwacci, “Nye, in ma imuko ot pa Lubaŋa woko, ci igero pi nino adek-ki, 	Those who passed by hurled insults at him, shaking their heads and saying, “So! You who are going to destroy the temple and build it in three days,
wotto ki wiye malo pe nenno ngati mo  	walks with his head alott and does not mind about anybody
Ci cako wacci, ‘Abidok gira i oda ka ma yam aa ki iye-ni.’ Ka obino, ci noŋo ode tye nono, giyweyo woko, dok giyubo woko maber. 	For as Jonah was three days and three nights in the belly of a huge fish, so the Son of Man will be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth.
rwido tol matek  	tying the rope tightly
Yecu odokke iye ni, “In iwaco giri kit meno	“You have said so,” Jesus replied
watye ki wonwa acel, en aye Lubaŋa.” 	You are doing the works of your own father.” “We are not illegitimate children,” they protested
abollo piny kuno	I threw it down there
“Bot lamalaika pa lwak muye an ma gitye i Epeco co kit man ni, “ ‘Man lok pa ŋat ma omako lakalatwe abiro i ciŋe tuŋ lacuc, ma tye ka wirre i dye okar-mac abiro. 	“To the angel of the church in Ephesus write: These are the words of him who holds the seven stars in his right hand and walks among the seven golden lampstands.
Piŋo wubedo ki par mapol pi ginaruka? Koŋ wutam pi leŋa me tim, kit ma gidoŋo kwede. 	Can any one of you by worrying add a single hour to your life?
gwok ka onenno ringo ci laa dongge cweer ni rororo 	when a dog sees a piece of meat its saliva drooles down the mouth
nyanne tika cunne? 	can this girl really be befriended? 
twerro cibbe i dero 	can be put in the granary
baddi okwot mada 	your arm is very swollen
nyakoni dong opittu 	this girl is now fully grown up (and having menses)
Ka doŋ watyeko karewa, wapokke kwedgi ci wamedde ki wotwa. Gin ducu gulwokowa, wa mon ki litino, gukelowa wa i ŋe gaŋ	When it was time to leave, we left and continued on our way
leg wii odok tung lacam 	bend your head to the left
gweni mapol ma dong atye kwedde ajullu gi ki cam awilla	many chicken which I have now I looked after them very well by feeding them with bought food
anyogi ne dok gipitto onyee twatwal 	the maize have been planted too closely
Yecu owaco botgi ni, “Camma en tiyo gin ma ŋat ma oora mito, ki cobo ticce. 	Then his disciples said to each other, “Could someone have brought him food?”
wabicitto diki 	we shall go tomorrow 
latinne kitte rac pyello i kabeddo ducu atata 	the child is bad because it difaecates anyhowly on the bed
Luparicayo ki Lucadukayo gubino, gubito Yecu ni onyut botgi lanyut ma oa i polo. 	The Pharisees and Sadducees came to Jesus and tested him by asking him to show them a sign from heaven.
Dok i ŋeye Juda ma Lagalilaya dok otuc io kare me kwano wel dano, ci otero jo mukene ma gilube	After him, Judas the Galilean appeared in the days of the census and led a band of people in revolt
ngadi ocirro yet pa Okema mada ma yette kwede jwii	so and so has endured the daily abusive words of Okema
bin opiyo piyo, pe igalle kuno 	come quickly, do not delay there
Pien ŋat ma tye ki gin ma gibimiyo doki makato, ci en bibedo ki jami mabup	Whoever has will be given more, and they will have an abundance
Pien meno ducu otimme wek ginacoya ocobbe kakare, ni, “Cogone mo pe gibituro.” 	But when they came to Jesus and found that he was already dead, they did not break his legs.
cutcut oa malo, ocako gwokogi. 	She got up at once and began to wait on them.
Aŋeca meno dok onene, ci dok ocako tito bot jo ma gucuŋ kunnu ni, “Dano man en bene ŋat acel ma i kingi.” 	When the servant girl saw him there, she said again to those standing around, “This fellow is one of them.”
“Atyeko tittiwu lok man wek pe komwu oryaŋŋe. 	Thanks be to God for his indescribable gift
Ŋat mukene owaco ni, ‘Pud anyomo dako anyoma nyen, pi meno pe atwero bino.’ 	“Still another said, ‘I just got married, so I can’t come.’
kwanynyo cukari mogo pa ominne ci bammo i kom meere 	he takes some of his brother's sugar and adds to his
Kica pa Rwotwa Yecu Kricito obed kwedwu.	And so do Mark, Aristarchus, Demas and Luke, my fellow workers.
“Doŋ wuwinyo ka yam giwaco ni, ‘Pe itim abor.’ 	“You have heard that it was said, ‘You shall not commit adultery.’
Ka onoŋo Yecu oecito Jerucalem, ci owok ki i waŋ apokki me Camaria ki Galilaya. 	Now on his way to Jerusalem, Jesus traveled along the border between Samaria and Galilee.
ka can obino, nyo libo dano ocakke, pi lok meno, cutcut gipoto woko. 	When trouble or persecution comes because of the word, they quickly fall away.
Gin ducu ma yam gicoyo i kare macon ca onoŋo gicoyo me pwonyowa, wek wacir can, dok bene owek wabed ki gen pi lok me cuko cwiny ma wakwano i ginacoya. 	For even Christ did not please himself but, as it is written: “The insults of those who insult you have fallen on me.”
Lok mukwoŋo ma atyeko winyone en aye ni, ka lwak gucokke kacel, apokapoka bedo tye i kinwu. An bene tuŋcel aye lok meno, 	In the first place, I hear that when you come together as a church, there are divisions among you, and to some extent I believe it.
nyut kama orocco iye i gin ma ocoyo i bukke 	point out where in his book, he made a mistake on what he wrote
Dano acel acel gire mitine kene aye ma bite, ywaye, kun omo cwinye. 	but each person is tempted when they are dragged away by their own evil desire and enticed.
itweyo wic yen man twec arwit koni bigony woko 	you have tied this bundle of firewood with running knot, that is granny knot, it will untie itself very soon
en lwoŋo romi ki nyiŋgi, ci terogi woko. 	The gatekeeper opens the gate for him, and the sheep listen to his voice
latinne pe munynyo cam maber nino ducu beddo ka gok 	the child does not swallow well, every time she vomits, whenever she is swallowing
gin ducu ononggo gimitto cammo lawang acel mape dok gipokko caa me cam ma pat pat 	they all want to eat at once together without having times of eating separated
Onen lawat mada, ka obinno kany ci limmo dano ducu 	Onen is truly a friendly relative, who, when he has come here, visits everybody 
pammo lobo i kom ot	to plaster the house with the clay house can be well plastered
Nen mucara pa lutic ma gitiyo i pottiwu ma wutwonogi kwede woko, tye ka kok	Look! The wages you failed to pay the workers who mowed your fields are crying out against you
litinomaca gicitto kwene? 	where are those children going? 
terro bongo i ot 	taking the cloth into the house
palaane lakke oluu nyo oligo 	the edge of the knife is blunt 
bed piny loo mac 	sit down and warm yourself 
jalle ka dong wotto ni gik gik ki waarre ma owillo manyen pe dong nenno gatti mo wacel 	the fellow walking with heavy sound ot the shoes that he bought recently, does not look at anybody at all
danone dong twil atwilla 	the man is getting thin and thinner 
twol ka tye ka too malle amalla ni dwanya dwanya 	when a snake is dying, it twists about 
oitto twon kwon mo me acamma 	she made a very big kwon millet bread for eating 
Kombeddi doŋ gin ma yam tye ki deyo doŋ odoko gin ma pe ki deyo kadi ki acel mo, pi deyo mukene ca ma doŋ kate matek twatwal-li. 	If the ministry that brought condemnation was glorious, how much more glorious is the ministry that brings righteousness!
Utmegiwa ma Rwot maro, myero wapwo Lubaŋa piwu nino ducu, pien Lubaŋa okwoŋo yerowu con wek elarwu pi Cwiny Maleŋ ma lonyowu wubedo maleŋ, ki pi ye lok me ada. 	But we ought always to thank God for you, brothers and sisters loved by the Lord, because God chose you as firstfruits to be saved through the sanctifying work of the Spirit and through belief in the truth.
“Bot lamalaika pa lwak muye an ma gitye i Pergamo co kit man ni, “ ‘Man lok pa ŋat ma tye ki pala lucwan mabit ryoryo. 	“To the angel of the church in Pergamum write: These are the words of him who has the sharp, double-edged sword.
ceŋ mo gibigonyo ginaketa woko ki i opii me bedo gin ma top, wek gunoŋ kuc ki deyo ma gimiyo ki litino pa Lubaŋa. 	For the creation waits in eager expectation for the children of God to be revealed.
gwok ringo kama kibolle iye kwon	a dog goes where it is given bread
litino awobewu ki anyirawu gibitito lok pa Lubaŋa, awobewu gibineno ginanyuta, jowu muti gibileko lek. 	Your sons and daughters will prophesy, your young men will see visions, your old men will dream dreams.
owillo cuka camanini aryo mabecco mada 	he bought a pair of lovely white cotton sheets 
twod latin ot mo 	build a small round hut
Pien Lubaŋa miyo gum i kom lobo ma mato kot ma cwer i kome kare ki kare, ka dok ceko ginapita ma konyo jo ma gipuro pigi. 	Land that drinks in the rain often falling on it and that produces a crop useful to those for whom it is farmed receives the blessing of God.
Yecu odoŋo kun medde i ryeko, dok kun medde ki noŋo pwoc ki bot Lubaŋa ki bot dano bene.	And Jesus grew in wisdom and stature, and in favor with God and man.
owacco nyinggi bot rwot  	he mentioned your name to the chief
goc matek i kom litino pe ber 	beating the children very much is not very good
mon myerro gudot litinogi 	women must suckle their babies
ladiro yubbo caa 	an expert watch repairer 
Mumiyo lwak jo mapol guye Yecu, ki lwak mon madito ma Lugrik ki co mapol. 	As a result, many of them believed, as did also a number of prominent Greek women and many Greek men.
bao ne obar woko 	the board is cracked or split
Dako myero opwonnye laliŋliŋ kun bedo ki winy. 	but with good deeds, appropriate for women who profess to worship God.
labolo cekke nen ka komme ducu dong odokko ocwak ocwak 	banana is known that it is ripe when all its body has become yellow
Ka ce ciŋi ma lacuc aye miyo ipoto i bal, toŋ iŋun ibol woko	And if your right hand causes you to stumble, cut it off and throw it away
pien Lubaŋa tye acel, en bikwano dano ma gilirogi ni kitgi atir pi niyegi, dok bene bikwano jo ma pe gilirogi ni kitgi atir pi niyegi. 	Or is God the God of Jews only? Is he not the God of Gentiles too? Yes, of Gentiles too,
dano ma timme rac kitmeno myerro pe gimiine kica 	a person whose behaviour is as bad as that should not be given a job
gitye ka lwerro pot labolo 	they are stripping off the banana leaves
Openyogi ni, “Aŋa i kinwu ma ka tye ki kanane nyo twonne ka opoto i waŋ it matut ci pe biywaye woko cutcut i ceŋ cabit?” 	Then he asked them, “If one of you has a child or an ox that falls into a well on the Sabbath day, will you not immediately pull it out?”
Ageno ni wubiniaŋ maber ni wan mere pe wabedo jo ma pe gipwoyogi. 	For it is not the one who commends himself who is approved, but the one whom the Lord commends.
giryammogi kong oyotoyot lacen guguny gubinno ki tek mape dong twerre ki wan 	they were easily chased at first but later on they retuned with great force which was impossible for us
ojwiny maarro beddo mada i kin ganggi ki i poto pamba kama gicammo iye kwkii matye i pamba 	ojwiny do stay in the homes and in the cotton fields where they eat the cotton insects 
mon mukene adagi kwon gwinygi dongo ma gunynye agunynya ka giwotto	some other women have big buttocks, which moves up and down when they walk
Aŋa i kinwu ma ryek dok niaŋ jami? En myero onyut tic me ryekone ki mwolo, pi kwone maber. 	Who is wise and understanding among you? Let them show it by their good life, by deeds done in the humility that comes from wisdom.
ogil en aye ogwang ma maarro makko gweno twatwal 	civet cat is one of the carnivore that likes very much to catch the chicken
Cik macon doŋ gibolo woko, pien onoŋo goro, dok konnye pe, 	The former regulation is set aside because it was weak and useless
oputte ki lok atta mape myero 	he burst out with uncalled for words
Pe myero ni Kricito ma Lubaŋa oyero onen can magi, wek odony i deyone?” 	He said to them, “How foolish you are, and how slow to believe all that the prophets have spoken!
Yecu odok iye ni, “Adada awacci ni, dano ka pe ginywale ki pii ki Cwiny, pe twero donyo i ker pa Lubaŋa. 	Jesus replied, “Very truly I tell you, no one can see the kingdom of God unless they are born again.”
jalli nanggo woko ni nang nang twon dek ma i canne ni 	the fellow is eating all the big food on his plate
Dok apenyo ni, “Jo Icrael mono yam pe guniaŋ?” Moses aye ma okwoŋo waco ni, “Abimiyo nyeko makowu i kom jo ma pe gin rok kikome, abimiyo kiniga makowu i kom rok mamiŋ.” 	But I ask: Did they not hear? Of course they did: “Their voice has gone out into all the earth, their words to the ends of the world.”
ryeb wii agulu dek eno ki laumme 	cover the sauce-pan or the pot for making sauce with its cover 
Ento in doŋ iŋiyo kweda woko kun ineno pwonnya, kita ki tam ma aketo i nyima. Ineno niyena, diyo cwinya, mar ma atye kwede, kit ma ayelle kwede kun aciro can. 	But they will not get very far because, as in the case of those men, their folly will be clear to everyone.
Rwot ogamo ni, “Kono yam wutye ki niye macalo nyig kodi dek karadali, kono wuwaco ki yat man ni, ‘Putte keni, ipitte i dye nam,’ kono owinyo dogwu. 	He replied, “If you have faith as small as a mustard seed, you can say to this mulberry tree, ‘Be uprooted and planted in the sea,’ and it will obey you.
opuk gunynyo wiye woko i pokke 	the tortoise withdraws it's head into its shell 
ocammo ringo ni raku raku 	he ate the meat with great greediness
“Aŋa ma lagwok ot ma lagen dok maryek, ma laditte biweko dano ducu ma bedo i ode i te locce, wek opok botgi camgi i kare ma mitte? 	“Who then is the faithful and wise servant, whom the master has put in charge of the servants in his household to give them their food at the proper time?
opotto ci ooddo wiye matek kiye ot 	he fell and knocked his head very hard on the floor of the house 
tik yoo acel keken 	follow only one way
koni abakki ki pala ka ibeddo ka yella	I will soon stab you with a knife if you continue to bother me
Ento wun pe myero gilwoŋwu ni, ‘Lapwony’, pien wutye ki lapwony acel, pi meno wun ducu doŋ wudoko omege. 	they love to be greeted with respect in the marketplaces and to be called ‘Rabbi’ by others.
danone maarro punno dano mada 	the man loves very much conning people
Lubaŋa legowu ki dwanwa, wan bene wabako dogwa botwu ma ka Kricito ni, Wuwek Lubaŋa odwokwu bote. 	We are therefore Christ’s ambassadors, as though God were making his appeal through us
latin nyako tye ka cacco nyim	the little girl is grinding the sesame
Otiyo tic matek ki bade, olalo luwakke i tam me cwinygi. 	He has performed mighty deeds with his arm; he has scattered those who are proud in their inmost thoughts.
lakwang yeya  	a rower of a boat 
nywang layatane maber ka dong igul iye ka dong igwee kwedde ki dek 	knead the potatoes well in your hand and make it into a form of a spoon and then scoop the sauce with it 
Wan waye, dok watyeko niaŋ ni, in i ŋat Maleŋ pa Lubaŋa.” 	Simon Peter answered him, “Lord, to whom shall we go? You have the words of eternal life.
ka pe kong iloggo cinggi, ci pe icit ka cam 	before you wash your hands do not go to eat 
daa Okeny konynyo litino mada 	Okeny's grandmother helps the children very much 
Lacen ka nino aryo meno okato, en ocito i Galilaya. 	They said to the woman, “We no longer believe just because of what you said; now we have heard for ourselves, and we know that this man really is the Savior of the world.”
puyo kom ot 	plastering the house or to decorate decorating the house 
ocek bolo bolo 	it is ripen well and soft
ento i kare man ma lacen-ni en doŋ oloko kwedwa i Wode. Jami ducu ma tye, Lubaŋa ceŋ otiyogi pi twer pa Wode, ma en oyubo ni myero obed won jami ducu. 	but in these last days he has spoken to us by his Son, whom he appointed heir of all things, and through whom also he made the universe.
Pi meno, Lubaŋa omiye dit ma malo twatwal, dok bene omiye nyiŋ ma tye malo makato nyiŋ mukene ducu, 	And being found in appearance as a man, he humbled himself by becoming obedient to death— even death on a cross!
miyo cing matek 	to clench the hand
can buk kikore ki kore i rek 	arrange the books in order on the shelves 
Gin ducu gucamo, guyeŋ 	They all ate and were satisfied,
lotto pe ngeyo purro pur maber 	the fellow does not know how to cultivate very well
pam kom ot man ki lobo 	plaster the walls of this house with clay
ucu bao maarro kello oyoo myerro giwang woko 	saw dust do encourage breeding of rats, it should be burnt
giliri ka gijwayo maber cim ryeny maber mada 	when the aluminium earrings are well polished, they shine very much 
dongge rac pe mitto cam 	he has no appetite or he does not like food 
cit kong iywee 	you go and rest
ogwenynyo congge woko ka gweyo odilo 	he dislocated his knee while playing football
willo kawa	to buy coffee
Rukwu pe obed ruk ma nen ki woko, macalo kedo yer wic, tweyo tiko jabu, ruko boŋŋi mabeco, 	when they see the purity and reverence of your lives.
“Carolok-ki tere ene: Kodi aye lok pa Lubaŋa. 	“This is the meaning of the parable: The seed is the word of God.
lapwony ocitto ka pwonynyo litino 	the teacher went to teach the children
adwal ringogi yom mada	young antelopes have very soft meat
del wangge twanynye maber 	his eyelid turned inside out easily 
muny i pii pe gin maber  	drowning in water is not a good thing
Tye ka mo ma gituco ka maleŋ ni, “Dano gin aŋo, mumiyo ipo pire? Nyo latin pa dano, mumiyo iparo pire? 	But there is a place where someone has testified: “What is mankind that you are mindful of them, a son of man that you care for him?
ŋat mo noŋo tye ki wer, mo tye ki pwony, mo tye ki lok ma ginyutte, mo dumo leb mapatpat, ki mo mukene noŋo ŋeyo gonyo te lokke. Gin-nu ducu myero otimme i yo ma konyo doŋo jo muye Kricito. 	Everything must be done so that the church may be built up.
Wulam gum i kom jo ma cenowu, wuleg pi jo ma nywarowu. 	bless those who curse you, pray for those who mistreat you.
gub cai ne agubba pien lyet 	take the tea a little at a time because it is hot 
dayamon pe nyonyo pieno pe tette ento gigollo angolla 	diamond is not a metal therefore it cannot be forged but only cut
giwacci icit Gulu ento in doki icitto meri Kampala 	you were told to go to Gulu but you went to Kampala instead
wang bao ma giribbo ka oribbe marac ci ngwec woko telokke ni pokke woko 	the joint of the wood plank if it was badly joined it separates spontaneously
man en aye twoo marac mada makello akwotta kwotta i gut dyang ki i tee badde ci nekko woko oyot oyot 	this is a very dangerous and infectious disease which causes swellings in the neck and under the fore limbs of the animal and kills it quickly
wacittu ka matto cai 	let us go to take tea
ongwec twon gweno donggo en aye ma gweyo kwedde Son gweno mukene ka gitye ka lweny 	the cock's spurs are big and strong, they are the means by which a cock kicks another cock, when they are fighting
Ka doŋ gin ducu gupoŋ ki Cwiny Maleŋ, ci gucako dumo leb mukene mapatpat macalo Cwiny Maleŋ omiyogi me lokone. 	All of them were filled with the Holy Spirit and began to speak in other tongues as the Spirit enabled them.
dano gimitto matto kongo ma noggo pud jibi 	the people like to drink the beer when it is still foaming 
Kit meno ka wan litino pa Lubaŋa, pe myero watamu ni Lubaŋa cal ki cal mo me jabu nyo ryal nyo got ma gipayo ki diro ki tam pa dano. 	“Therefore since we are God’s offspring, we should not think that the divine being is like gold or silver or stone—an image made by human design and skill.
dok bene ni giyike, ka doŋ gicere woko i nino me adekke, kun lubo coc ma yam gicoyo, 	that he was buried, that he was raised on the third day according to the Scriptures,
Ento ka Kricito tye i iwu, kadi bed komwu to pi bal, ento cwinywu bedo kwo, pien yam doŋ gikwanowu woko ni kitwu atir. 	Those who are in the realm of the flesh cannot please God.
ŋat ma mara Wora bimare, an bene abimare, abinyutte kena bote.” 	Whoever has my commands and keeps them is the one who loves me
in nene dong io akwoo kany pien pe wanngeyo ninoni me oo kany	last time you came here secretly because we did not know the day of your arrival here
Adada awacciwu ni, wubikok, wubikumo, ento lobo cwinye bibedo yom	They kept asking, “What does he mean by ‘a little while’? We don’t understand what he is saying.”
Ka kare okato manok, dakone Elicabet ogamo ic. Okanne kwede pi dwe abic, kun waco ni, 	After this his wife Elizabeth became pregnant and for five months remained in seclusion.
An pe alone kena? An pe lakwena? Yam pe aneno Rwotwa Yecu Kricito? Wun pe adwoggi me ticca i Rwot? 	Am I not free? Am I not an apostle? Have I not seen Jesus our Lord? Are you not the result of my work in the Lord?
Ci wuciti oyotoyot wutit bot lupwonnyene ni en doŋ ocer woko ki i kin jo muto, nen, en doŋ okwoŋo nyimwu me cito i Galilaya	The guards were so afraid of him that they shook and became like dead men.
oyoo inyerro obed tye kany nen cette tye i wii meja ene 	a rat must be here, look, here is its droppings on the table
cukari twerro pikke i kicaa man 	the sugar can be filled in this bag
dano acel acel myerro ongee mada lok me legga	everyone must know very much about prayer
aweno wanggi bit mada ginenno labal ma giterro pigi ci giwok woko kamukenne omiyo pe gimokko attata  	the guinea fowls have sharp eyes and usually they see 
Petero otuco bot Yecu ni, “Kadi ka jo mukene ducu gibitenyi woko, ento an pe abitenyi ata.” 	Peter replied, “Even if all fall away on account of you, I never will.”
tin gitye ka nyonne mada	today they are kicking each other very badly 
remmo lok me mung i nyim kacokke	to blurt out a very important secret to the assembly
wek dano pa Lubaŋa obed muteggi, ma bene oyubbe i yo ducu, ma romo tiyo kit tic mo maber ducu.	All Scripture is God-breathed and is useful for teaching, rebuking, correcting and training in righteousness,
wubin i nino meno wek gicaŋwu, pe i ceŋ cabit.” 	So come and be healed on those days, not on the Sabbath.”
nyebbe ki lapwony	to become familiar with the teacher 
otyekko ticce hog ka dong ocakko wotte 	he finished his work first then he started on his journey 
Ka doŋ oloko lok man, ci olokke, oneno Yecu kun ocuŋ i ŋeye, ento pe oŋeyo ni en Yecu. 	They asked her, “Woman, why are you crying?” “They have taken my Lord away,” she said, “and I don’t know where they have put him.”
baa karatac magi woko 	throw these papers outside
Kit macalo litino i kare ducu giribbe i kom ki remo, en bene kit meno onywako kwedgi komgi ki remogi, wek pi tone eŋiny ŋat ma tye ki twer i kom to woko, meno en aye Catan, 	Since the children have flesh and blood, he too shared in their humanity so that by his death he might break the power of him who holds the power of death—that is, the devil—
Yam tye Lujudaya mo ajwaka madit ma nyiŋe Cekewa, ma awobene abiro gitimo kit meno. 	Seven sons of Sceva, a Jewish chief priest, were doing this.
dano me nino man dong pe genne gin lukwoo keken 	the present people are untrusted, most of them are thieves
lukwaa Owot mogo dong onyommo muno 	some of Owot's grandchildren have married Europeans
lakke pe twerro mukke kany pien gin la mukke pe kany 	his teeth cannot be uprooted here because there is no instrument for uprooting teeth here
tyenne tung lacam ma obeddo apim twerro gunne laboggo ayella me 	the left leg which has elephantiasis can be amputated without a problem
gupirro lok i komme 	they conspired or plotted against him
Aŋa mono ma bitimowu marac ka wuketo cwinywu me tiyo gin maber? 	They must turn from evil and do good; they must seek peace and pursue it.
I ŋe gaŋ woko tye iye jo ma timo tim calo gin gwogi, lutim tim jokjok, lutim abor, lunek dano, ki luwor cal jogi, ki jo ducu ma maro loko goba, kun gitiyo bene gin me gobagoba. 	Outside are the dogs, those who practice magic arts, the sexually immoral, the murderers, the idolaters and everyone who loves and practices falsehood.
Yecu ocur ki i cwinye matek kun wacci, “Piŋo yalwak me kare man gimito lanyut? Adada, awacciwu ni, pe gibimiyo lanyut mo bot yalwak me kare man.” 	He sighed deeply and said, “Why does this generation ask for a sign? Truly I tell you, no sign will be given to it.”
Ka dano mo owinyo lok me ker pa Lubaŋa ce pe oniaŋ iye, Larac bino ci mayo kodi ma gicoyo i cwinye-ni woko	When anyone hears the message about the kingdom and does not understand it, the evil one comes and snatches away what was sown in their heart
Dok inoŋ aguragura bene pi Paulo wek oriŋ kwede wek itere ki kuc bot Pelici laloyo.” 	Provide horses for Paul so that he may be taken safely to Governor Felix.”
ladit ma gwokko gang 	the elder who looks after the affairs of the family
Ka doŋ otyeko o i Cecaria, ci ocito i Jerucalem ka moto jo muye Kricito, ka doŋ olor piny i Antiokia. 	When he landed at Caesarea, he went up to Jerusalem and greeted the church and then went down to Antioch.
cente ma jigi-jigi ni tye kwene?	where are the coins pieces?
tal man bor twatwal ngun woko 	this pole is too tall cut it off 
man dong kicaa me apar me cementi ma gikello kany 	this is the tenth bag of cement that has been brought here
Dano ma gin jo pa Kricito Yecu doŋ gutyeko neko par ki miti me kit pa dano woko, ci guguro woko bene i kom yatariya. 	Against such things there is no law.
dakone dok ryanynyo kwon twatwal	the woman makes very big kwon
Ka dano mo i kinwu tye ki lok mo i kom lawote, piŋo lewic pe make me pido ki dano-nu i nyim jo ma kitgi pe atir, ma ka pido kwede i nyim jo pa Lubaŋa? 	If any of you has a dispute with another, do you dare to take it before the ungodly for judgment instead of before the Lord’s people?
En pe tye ki twer i koma	I will not say much more to you, for the prince of this world is coming
guyaarre ka lweny 	they got out to fight 
man dano ma lakili mada 	this is a man who is very quarrelsome
Ento wun yam wutimo ber me ribbe kweda i can munoŋo odiya. 	I can do all this through him who gives me strength.
Ento ka lukwena Barnaba ki Paulo guwinyo pire, ci guyeco boŋŋigi kun gibaro dye lwak ki daŋŋe ni, 	But when the apostles Barnabas and Paul heard of this, they tore their clothes and rushed out into the crowd, shouting:
Guneno jo mogo ma i kin lupwonnyene ma pe gilubo kwer, ento gicamo ma pe gulogo ciŋgi. 	and saw some of his disciples eating food with hands that were defiled, that is, unwashed.
litino gitye ka tukko pyee malo ki pyee piny mabor 	the children are in high jump and long jump games
Abanya ocitto kwene? 	where has Abanya gone?
otonno Butte caa 	she poses her neck there, she stretches her neck there
ageno bene ni kitwa otyeko nen botwu ki ŋec ma tye i cwinywu ma nyuttiwu bal. 	Since, then, we know what it is to fear the Lord, we try to persuade others
pur kwerine otur woko myero dok owil mukene 	his hoe's handle is broken, he should buy another one
trot koni gukko woko ka pe i moyo kalli kombedi 	if you do not put out your millet to dry now, the rain may come unexpectedly and prevents it from drying
anyubba nyubba obinno pi mitti madowong me Um 	the confusion came as a result of excessive desire for money
litino tin gupwoone mada pi mot mapol mada ma gimiinigi pi loyo i tukko mapol me ngwec 	the children today were very thankful for the gifts which they were given for winning many events of the athletics
kella lakkii me tenno agulu 	bring me a piece of stone for supporting the pot 
ludito kanica nino ducu gibeddo wii lobele ka gitye ka leggo ki dano 	the priests always sit on the platform when praying with the people
mon guggo me wooro coo maditto 	women kneel as respect to the elderly men
jwaa kwok woko ma i wanggi 	wipe off the sweat from your face 
nen ca en dok tye ka gak ka mukene 	look he is turning the wrong direction
En openyogi ni, “Peya wuniaŋ aye?” 	He said to them, “Do you still not understand?”
lwalle i myel, i cubbo lawala, i wer ki gala. 	competing in dancing, in circle game, in singing and making fun of each other
Man aye mar, ni myero walub cik pa Lubaŋa	It has given me great joy to find some of your children walking in the truth, just as the Father commanded us.
doŋ wumi yomcwinya ocobbe maber kit man: wubed ki tam acel ki mar acel, kun wuribbe kacel i cwinywu, tamwu bene myero obed acel. 	Therefore if you have any encouragement from being united with Christ, if any comfort from his love, if any common sharing in the Spirit, if any tenderness and compassion,
joo pa ywecca 	the people of my brother in law
cit flee jami pa worm 	go and inherit your father's properties
Ago kama yom en aye gigollo me amal 	the soft parts of meat are the ones which are cut for frying 
En bioro lumalaika ki tum ma kok maloŋo, gibicoko jone ma en oyero ki i twok piny aŋwen ducu, nia ki i agikki polo tuŋcel nio kwede wa i agikkine mukene. 	And he will send his angels with a loud trumpet call, and they will gather his elect from the four winds, from one end of the heavens to the other.
I kare-nu onoŋo gitye ki lamabuc mo ma ŋene ma nyiŋe Baraba. 	Now it was the governor’s custom at the festival to release a prisoner chosen by the crowd.
tye ka canno buk i wii meja 	he is piling up books on the table
En dok owaco ni, “Man en gin mumiyo ceŋ atittiwu ni, pe tye ŋat mo ma twero bino bota, ka Won pe omiye twer.” 	Yet there are some of you who do not believe.” For Jesus had known from the beginning which of them did not believe and who would betray him.
danone pe mitto nyutte kama leng	the man does not want to be openly shown
pali macego becco mada ki litino 	short pairs of trousers are very good for the children
anyeeri cammo twatwal ki wor 	the edible rats eat a lot at night
dok wan pe waŋeyo ŋat ma oyabo waŋe. Wupenye	But how he can see now, or who opened his eyes, we don’t know
pien kadi bed dano mapol yam guto pi bal pa ŋat acel ca, ento kica pa Lubaŋa ki mot me nono ma obino pi kica pa dano acel-li, Yecu Kricito, obedo dit makato, onya oromo lwak dano mapol ata. 	But the gift is not like the trespass
Lok man ducu otimme i Betania loka Jordan, ka ma Jon yam obedo ka batija iye dano. 	He is the one who comes after me, the straps of whose sandals I am not worthy to untie.”
obeddo ka wirro lakodi moo moni ci obokko komme woko 	he has been dyeing with a certain oil on his body and has turned his body brown  
latin owangge marac mada 	the child burnt himself very badly 
putto gwana woko pe ber myerro ikwiny akwinya keken wek dok onywal mukene 	uprooting the cassava is not good, you should only take some of the roots but leave the tree there so that it may produce some more
Pe gibiloro dogcelle i dyeceŋ, ki dyewor bene bibedo pe kunnu. 	On no day will its gates ever be shut, for there will be no night there.
pe layo lac maber 	does not pass urine well 
Pien rok bilweny ki rok wadi, ki ker bene bilweny ki ker wadi, 	Nation will rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom
dano ma ocwiny inenno ki kit ticce, nino ducu timmo gin matir ma opore 	a mature person can be seen by his type of work, he always does his work very well and from very near
potto pa iye oa pi twoo 	her abortion came as a result of illness
gin angoo ma itye ka catto ne? 	sells new ideology
pien kwarigi yam gutimo lunebi kit meno. 	For that is how their ancestors treated the prophets.
tye ka gkido latin  	he is tickling the child
gin lumoone 	they are his enemies 
ci wabedo piny ka lok mon ma gugurre. 	We sat down and began to speak to the women who had gathered there.
abworre me gin ma amitto tittiwu en ene	this is the introduction of the things that I want to tell you
aburro ki odoo	I frightened him with a stick
Dano pe pire tek twatwal kato pi romo? Pi meno cik ye ni myero gitim gin maber i ceŋ cabit.” 	He said to them, “If any of you has a sheep and it falls into a pit on the Sabbath, will you not take hold of it and lift it out?
Mumiyo doŋ onen bota macalo cik ni, ka amito tiyo gin ma atir, ci gin marac nyiko cok kweda. 	Now if I do what I do not want to do, it is no longer I who do it, but it is sin living in me that does it.
Wan doki wabiwaco gin aŋo? Wabiwaco ni Lubaŋa pe ŋolo kop atir dok kakare? Pe kumeno! 	Just as it is written: “Jacob I loved, but Esau I hated.”
dakone dok jwiyo jwic twatwal 	his wife is always hissing
tye ki mitti me lira mada 	has excessive desire for wealth 
Oa woko ki i gin marac, oti gin maber, oyeny kuc dok oti matek wek onoŋ. 	For, “Whoever would love life and see good days ust keep their tongue from evil and their lips from deceitful speech.
latinni tukko i bar ma genno bongone ki daba 	this child rolls in the field which soils his clothes with mud 
dok ni, “Wupak Rwot, wun Lurok ducu, wek lwak me rok ducu gupake.” 	For I tell you that Christ has become a servant of the Jews on behalf of God’s truth, so that the promises made to the patriarchs might be confirmed
ci guye ginacoya ki lok ma yam Yecu oloko. 	After he was raised from the dead, his disciples recalled what he had said
giyiiro wangge woko ci wangge otoo woko 	his eyes were bewitched and he became blind
gwok cam i kin lwak ma ditto 	does not know how to eat in public with respectable people
lak palaa bam oyot oyot ka gicwerro ki cogo 	the edge of the knife gets deformed easily if it is used for scraping the bones 
min ic okatto woko ki i gwiny 	prolapsed rectum, or excessively long intussuscept ion has come out through the rectum
Cwinywu obed yom i nino meno, kun wupye ki yomcwiny, pien bakacic ma gibimiyowu me pwoc dit, tye i polo	“Rejoice in that day and leap for joy, because great is your reward in heaven
Lubaŋa mono tye pi Lujudaya keken? Pe en bene Lubaŋa pa Lurok? Iyo, ada, en bene Lubaŋa pa Lurok, 	For we maintain that a person is justified by faith apart from the works of the law.
Pe wanyatte ma okato kare i kom tic ma jo mukene aye guyelle iye	We are not going too far in our boasting, as would be the case if we had not come to you, for we did get as far as you with the gospel of Christ.
yoone pe atir ento ogwangge woko 	the road is not straight but bent
Yecu owaccigi ni, “Atyeko nyuttiwu tic mabeco mapol ma oa ki bot Won	Again his Jewish opponents picked up stones to stone him,
gicwalli ni icitti pingo pud i tye ka nigge kany?, cit oyot oyot 	you were sent to go there, why are you still wasting time here, go quickly
lumat kongo gimaarro ringo abulla mada	the people who drink alcohol love very much grilled meat
“Dok bene i kabedo ka ma yam awaco botgi iye ni, ‘Wun pe wujona,’ gibilwoŋogi iye ni, ‘litino pa Lubaŋa makwo.’ ” 	As he says in Hosea: “I will call them ‘my people’ who are not my people; and I will call her ‘my loved one’ who is not my loved one,”
yamo koddo tukko apwa 	the dust makes people cough very much
lamalaika obinno bot Maliam ka titte ni ebinywallo Yecu 	the angel came to Mary to tell her that she will give birth to Jesus
rutto lok i kom dano	to instigate a case against a person
Ada, awaco botwu ni, lunebi mapol ki jo ma kitgi atir yam guparo pi neno gin ma wun wuneno-ni, ento pe guneno, ki me winyo gin ma wuwinyo, ento pe guwinyo. 	For truly I tell you, many prophets and righteous people longed to see what you see but did not see it, and to hear what you hear but did not hear it.
maar en aye gin acel ma dano acel acel myerro obed kwede i cwinynye 	love is the one thing that everyone should have in her heart
ento gin ma pire dit ma katogi ducu en aye mar.	But the greatest of these is love.
Man bimiyo kuc pa Lubaŋa ma kato ŋec pa jo ducu gwoko cwinywu ki tamwu maber i Kricito Yecu. 	Do not be anxious about anything, but in every situation, by prayer and petition, with thanksgiving, present your requests to God.
pukko kado i dek	to put excessive salt in the sauce 
Lupwony-cik ki Luparicayo gukiye ka en bicaŋe i ceŋ cabit, wek giyeny yo me kelo kop i kome. 	The Pharisees and the teachers of the law were looking for a reason to accuse Jesus, so they watched him closely to see if he would heal on the Sabbath.
Wuwek doŋ keccwiny ducu, ki waŋ-ic ki kiniga, da i wi dano mukene, yet, kacel ki raccwiny ducu.	And do not grieve the Holy Spirit of God, with whom you were sealed for the day of redemption.
Man aye ŋat ma yam gicoyo lok i kome ni, ‘Nen, acwalo lakwenana otelo nyimi, ma bigero yoni ma peya in ibino.’ 	This is the one about whom it is written: “‘I will send my messenger ahead of you, who will prepare your way before you.’
gwog gin marac genuo dano lokko lok maber 	stammering is a very bad thing it prevents a person to speak well 
Odok iye ni, “Ŋat ma otime kicani.” Yecu owacce ni, “In bene cit, icitim kit meno.” 	The expert in the law replied, “The one who had mercy on him.” Jesus told him, “Go and do likewise.”
lakalatwe bia ki i polo, gipoto piny ki twer ducu ma i polo bene biyeŋŋe.’ 	the stars will fall from the sky, and the heavenly bodies will be shaken.’
Owoto kacel kwedgi, obino Najaret, obedo kun winyogi	Then he went down to Nazareth with them and was obedient to them
anyogi twerro pitte kany  	maize can be planted here
tem latin meno twerro palle pien tukko twatwal I kilaci 	the child's cheek can be slapped because she plays too much in class 
pimmo lee ki luduku 	to aim at the animal with the gun
Won maro Wod, ci nyutte gin ducu ma en tiyo	For this reason they tried all the more to kill him; not only was he breaking the Sabbath, but he was even calling God his own Father, making himself equal with God.
baa odilone botta kany 	throw the ball to me here
Lakalatwe me polo guo woko piny lirutrut calo nyig yat oduro me cwir ma poto ki i jaŋe ka yamo ma okodo matek oyeŋo. 	and the stars in the sky fell to earth, as figs drop from a fig tree when shaken by a strong wind.
otwong kongo wille	beer cups pay for one another
Cutcut guwinyo dwan maloŋo ma oa i polo kun waco ni, “Wuit wubin malo kany!” Ci guito i polo i pol, ma lukworgi bene gineno. 	Then they heard a loud voice from heaven saying to them, “Come up here.” And they went up to heaven in a cloud, while their enemies looked on.
tic tin orocce 	today he failed to do his normal share of work or the work could not be done
lamone meeri  	who is your enemy?
gwok jalle mada pien dano ma ladwanynya, twerro dwanynyo tee lok woko 	be careful with him, he can change the meaning of what you talked about
giwacci lacoone tye ki twer me cenno dano 	it is said that the man has power of cursing people 
tamme tye kwene i kom lok man 	what is his opinion or where is his thought or idea on this matter?
nyetto dyang	to milk the cow 
Ka yam onoŋo Yecu woto kun ŋolo dye poto bel i nino me cabit, ka gitye ka wot, lupwonnyene gucako rito wit bel. 	One Sabbath Jesus was going through the grainfields, and as his disciples walked along, they began to pick some heads of grain.
ento wumito neka, pien lokka pe noŋo kabedo i iwu. 	I know that you are Abraham’s descendants
miina mono wek kon anen bene 	give it to me so that I may also see it
Lok ma dok i kom cam ma gityero bot jogi. Waŋeyo ni, “wan ducu watye ki ŋec.” Kit ŋec meno miyo dano giwakke awaka, ento mar medo tek bot dano. 	Now about food sacrificed to idols: We know that “We all possess knowledge.” But knowledge puffs up while love builds up.
ŋat ma ŋeyo Lubaŋa winyo lokwa, ento ŋat ma pe en dano pa Lubaŋa pe winyo lokwa. Meno aye gin ma miyo waŋeyo poko cwiny me ada ki cwiny me goba. 	This is how we recognize the Spirit of truth and the spirit of falsehood.
oaa ka lokko bot litino cukul ni guket cwinygi ka kwan keken pe gudok dokki katimmo jami atata mukene 	he came from talking to the school children that they should put their minds studying and not to doing some other useless things
Ka oneno Petero ki Jon gimito donyo i ot pa Lubaŋa, ci openyogi ni gumiye kony. 	When he saw Peter and John about to enter, he asked them for money.
purro poto ki rwot ma kaka cullo mucoro ma ononggo gilwonggo ni luwalo 	cultivation of the chief's field instead of paying the tax which was then called luwalo
Ki lwak lunebi ducu ma yam guloko, cakke wa i kom Camuel ki jo ma gulubo kore, gutito bene pi kare man. 	“Indeed, beginning with Samuel, all the prophets who have spoken have foretold these days.
gucitto i cuma waaro ka tic iye 	they went to work in the cotton ginnery 
Ka ao botwu kunnu, ci abicwalo jo ma wun wuyero me tero motwu i Jerucalem, kun noŋo amiyogi bene waraga. 	Then, when I arrive, I will give letters of introduction to the men you approve and send them with your gift to Jerusalem.
man en aye kijiko me lapok cam 	this is a spoon for distributing food
I kare ma gitye ka miyo woro bot Rwot ki ri kec, ci Cwiny Maleŋ owaco ni, “Wukwannya Barnaba ki Caulo pi tic ma alwoŋogi pire-ni.” 	While they were worshiping the Lord and fasting, the Holy Spirit said, “Set apart for me Barnabas and Saul for the work to which I have called them.”
gangge tye lokka kulo tung kwica 	his home is over the river there 
Ka wegi lobo-nu guneno twol mulyerre ki i bade, gucako lok kekengi ni, “Ada, laco man lanek. Kadi ka olarre ki i nam, laŋolkop atir pe ye ni obed kwo.” 	When the islanders saw the snake hanging from his hand, they said to each other, “This man must be a murderer; for though he escaped from the sea, the goddess Justice has not allowed him to live.”
wangge opalle  	he has got squint or has cross eyes
Ladit ma loyo askari, ma onoŋo ocuŋ cok i nyime, ka oneno kit ma Yecu oto kwede, owacci, “Adada, dano man onoŋo Wod pa Lubaŋa!” 	And when the centurion, who stood there in front of Jesus, saw how he died, he said, “Surely this man was the Son of God!”
Dok bene pe tye ŋat mo ma yerre kene pi dit man, Lubaŋa aye ma lwoŋe iye, macalo olwoŋo Aron.	And no one takes this honor on himself, but he receives it when called by God, just as Aaron was.
twoor gioddo ki lobo agulo me acweya 	the mallet is used for beating clay soft for pottery
Ento gin ma katti ki i dog a ki i cwiny dano, man aye balo dano. 	“Don’t you see that whatever enters the mouth goes into the stomach and then out of the body?
Gin ma i kom pata aye jo ma winyo, ci gigamo lok ki yomcwiny	Those on the rocky ground are the ones who receive the word with joy when they hear it, but they have no root
kama ginne lye iye twerro cimme? 	can where the thing is be pointed at can it be pointed at where the thing is?
Dano ducu gibineno kit ma Lubaŋa olarowa kwede.” 	And all people will see God’s salvation.’”
I kaka pa Juda giketo lanyut i kom dano alip apar wiye aryo. I kaka pa Reuben giketo lanyut i kom dano alip apar wiye aryo. I kaka pa Gad giketo lanyut i kom dano alip apar wiye aryo. 	From the tribe of Judah 12,000 were sealed, from the tribe of Reuben 12,000, from the tribe of Gad 12,000,
gitye ka tetto kweri 	they are forging hoes
Meno pe ticca me ŋolo kop i kom jo ma pe guye Yecu. Lubaŋa aye ma biŋolo kop i komgi. Pe myero wun aye wuŋol kop i kom jo muye Lubaŋa ma gitye i kinwu? 	What business is it of mine to judge those outside the church? Are you not to judge those inside?
Ka ma kom dano muto tye iye, acut bene gicokke kunnu. 	Wherever there is a carcass, there the vultures will gather.
Ento dano ma winyo lokka kun pe tiyo, rom ki dano ma ogero ot i ŋom laboŋo guti	But the one who hears my words and does not put them into practice is like a man who built a house on the ground without a foundation
Ento ka Rwot oye abio botwu oyot, ka wek abinene tek pa jo ma gitye ka wakke-ni, ento pe lok ma giloko aloka. 	But I will come to you very soon, if the Lord is willing, and then I will find out not only how these arrogant people are talking, but what power they have.
jugge twatwal genggo dano cakko wot	moving about too much doing nothing prevents people starting the journey see
pany en aye gin me oddo bel 	pany is a motar for pounding cereals 
dano mapol guterro ature madowong mada i wii lyel pa Onek	many people took many flowers to Onek's funeral
ci giketo wiye i weer gikelo gimiyo bot nyako-nu, ka nyako-nu otero bot minne. 	and had John beheaded in the prison.
latin tye ka gubbo cak agubba pien lyet 	the child is sipping a little by little the milk because it is hot 
lagem pe mittoni gilimme pien lworroni gibinno ka remme ki cam 	he is not satisfied with your food
doggolane owiime woko 	the door's shutter is bent 
danone Immo lok doki twatwal 	he is a man who cannot always tell you straightaway anything but beats about the bush
miya kongo manok wek an bene abil	give me a small amount of the beer so that I may also taste it
wii leela twerro gonne maber dok tung lacuc 	the bicycle can be turned easily to the right
yoggo doggola	to loosen the door
mupalici me nino man ducu dong me pwom keken pien yom mada 	most of the mattresses of these days are made of foam only because they are very soft
Openyogi ni, “I ceŋ cabit, cik ye ni gitim iye gin maber nyo gin marac, gilar iye kwo nyo ginek woko?” Ento gin guliŋ aliŋa. 	Then Jesus asked them, “Which is lawful on the Sabbath: to do good or to do evil, to save life or to kill?” But they remained silent.
Man otimme tyen adek, ci jami meno gidwoko woko i polo. 	This happened three times, and immediately the sheet was taken back to heaven.
ongweyo yamo	he has smelt the wind
Ka oniaŋ ni en tye i te loc pa Kerode, ci ocwale bot Kerode, ma en kikome bene onoŋo tye i Jerucalem i kare-nu. 	When he learned that Jesus was under Herod’s jurisdiction, he sent him to Herod, who was also in Jerusalem at that time.
pimmo kare maber me timmo gin mo 	waiting for the right time to do something
tweny latin obed maber 	straighten the child to his senses to be a good child
ketto giggi i kome 	having a grudge or rancour against him 
“An awacci ni, a malo, itiŋ kabutoni, icit giri paco.” 	“I tell you, get up, take your mat and go home.”
Myero wuŋe ni ominwa Temceo doŋ gigonyo woko	I want you to know that our brother Timothy has been released
amera me willo motoka manyen dong mitto nekke woko 	the showing off of buying a new car is almost killing him
ot otudde ki yito 	the house was filled with smoke
wotto jangge ajanga 	walks swanggering about
En pe tye kany, ento ocer woko.] Wupo lok ma yam en owaco botwu i kare ma pud en tye i Galilaya, 	In their fright the women bowed down with their faces to the ground, but the men said to them, “Why do you look for the living among the dead?
Wugwokke, utmegina, wek ŋat mo i kinwu pe obed ki cwiny marac, cwiny ma pe ye Lubaŋa, ma twero miyo en a woko ki bot Lubaŋa makwo. 	See to it, brothers and sisters, that none of you has a sinful, unbelieving heart that turns away from the living God.
Inogga ape gang pien ononggo dong adok ka tic	you did not find me at home, because I had returned to work
en mumiyo kadi bed onoŋo wadoko jo muto pi turo cikke, en omiyo wadoko kwo kacel ki Kricito. Lubaŋa olarowu pi kicane. 	Like the rest, we were by nature deserving of wrath.
myero ocam cwee madowong ka wek okel komme maber 	should eat more meat soup in order to make him put on weight
en aye ma loyo Albania 	he is the one who rules Albania
moro onyem i doggola mape wacce 	the soldier ants have amassed themselves so much at the door
guboyo waŋe woko bene ki kitambara kun gipenye ni, “Ka in lanebi tuci! Aŋa mugoyi?” 	They blindfolded him and demanded, “Prophesy! Who hit you?”
Ci olwoŋogi ni, “Wubin wulub kora, ci an abimiyo wudoko lumak dano.” 	“Come, follow me,” Jesus said, “and I will send you out to fish for people.”
nyugi maarro beddo i bonggi mcol ki wic macol mane gilwokko tere tere 	lice love to stay in dirty clothes and dirty hair 
pokko dyel macol kom matar	to separate black goats from the white ones
Piny oyeŋŋe, ki pata-gu gubar woko	At that moment the curtain of the temple was torn in two from top to bottom
gweno dong otokko 	the hen has hatched
Kit macalo gicoko kwede doo giwaŋo woko i mac, bibedo bene kit meno i agikki piny. 	“As the weeds are pulled up and burned in the fire, so it will be at the end of the age.
Ci Yecu odok iye ni, “Pe ber me kwanyo cam pa litino me bolone woko bot gwogi.” 	He answered, “I was sent only to the lost sheep of Israel.”
carok acel acel ducu matye kany myerro obin ka coyo nyigge i buk ka wek gigee kama en beddo iye 	every foreigner who is here, must come for registration so that the place where she stays is known
Wabitiyo man giwa ka Lubaŋa oye. 	And God permitting, we will do so.
Ento ladit ma loyo askari ogamo lokke ni, “Ladit, an pe amyero me wek ibin idony i oda	Jesus said to him, “Shall I come and heal him?”
Yecu odonyo i ot pa Lubaŋa, ocako ryemo lucat-wil woko ki iye, 	When Jesus entered the temple courts, he began to drive out those who were selling.
Pi meno owaco ni, “Yam tye wod ker mo ma oa ocito i lobo mabor ka limo twerone me loc ka doŋ odwog cen. 	He said: “A man of noble birth went to a distant country to have himself appointed king and then to return.
Pilipo ogamo doge ni, “Rwot, nyuttiwa Won, ci biromowa.” 	From now on, you do know him and have seen him.”
nyebbe ka wot ma nok nok ki odiko con ci mot mot ibinong go ni imaarro wot 	get used to walking from time to time, in the morning and slowly you will find that you love to walk everyday 
bac ma citto Nairobi wekko kany odiko 	the bus to Nairobi leaves here in the morning
ageca na ni tye kwene? 	where is my slave?
wang burre cwer motoli ma beddi nyanga-nyatjar 	the wound is open and weeping serous fluid
lok ma ilokkoni gammone pud dong obwoya woko 	what you have said I cannot answer to it for the moment, I am defeated
Macalo Lubaŋa genne, lok ma yam wawaco botwu pe waloko ka dok lacen wakwero woko. 	Was I fickle when I intended to do this? Or do I make my plans in a worldly manner so that in the same breath I say both “Yes, yes” and “No, no”?
Wun lutic, wuwiny luditowu me lobo man ki cwinywu acel, macalo wuwinyo Kricito, kun wulworogi ki myelkom. 	Fathers, do not exasperate your children; instead, bring them up in the training and instruction of the Lord.
Ento Luparicayo guwacci, “En ryemo cen pi twero pa ladit pa cen.” 	While they were going out, a man who was demon-possessed and could not talk was brought to Jesus.
Ci Barnaba onoŋo mito ni giwot ki Jon ma nyiŋe mukene Marako, 	Barnabas wanted to take John, also called Mark, with them,
nyig yatte obeddo kigwee gwee 	the fruit has rather bitter acidic taste
Tye ŋat mo i kin luloc nyo i kin Luparicayo ma oye en? 	“You mean he has deceived you also?” the Pharisees retorted.
Atye ki lok mapol me aloka i komwu, ki kop mapol me aŋola	You are of this world; I am not of this world.
moko kwon tye kwene? 	where is the flour for making kwon? 
iyee miyo lim	you have agreed to provide the money
doggolane twerro pungge maber 	the door can be closed very well 
Oneno dato mo ma lacan, ma obolo cente aryo ma rom ki cente abic me kare-ni. 	He also saw a poor widow put in two very small copper coins.
ocung kwica ni rwenynyeke 	he stood there disorderly 
gin angoo ma tye ka yelli? 	what is it that is bothering you?
pien tic ma Won omiya me acoba, tic magi kikomgi ma atye ka tiyogi, bedo caden i koma ni Won aye oora. 	“I have testimony weightier than that of John
ywee dye ot maleng 	sweep the floor very well
Yecu onenogi, owaco botgi ni, “Wucit wunyutte kenwu bot ajwagi pa Lubaŋa.” Man pud gitye ka cito, komgi olony. 	When he saw them, he said, “Go, show yourselves to the priests.” And as they went, they were cleansed.
Lacen Yecu ocito kwedgi i kabedo mo ma nyiŋe Gececemane, ci ociko lupwonnyene ni, “Wun koŋ wubed kany, an koŋ acit kuca ka lego Lubaŋa.” 	Then Jesus went with his disciples to a place called Gethsemane, and he said to them, “Sit here while I go over there and pray.”
Alego ni ka twerre, ka Lubaŋa oye, olo myero anoŋ yo me bino botwu i kare-ni. 	God, whom I serve in my spirit in preaching the gospel of his Son, is my witness how constantly I remember you
pokke pa dano oa pi larro gum 	separation of the people (into tribes) came because of the struggle for land
Pi meno ajwagi madito pa Lubaŋa guyubo lok me neko Lajaro bene, 	Meanwhile a large crowd of Jews found out that Jesus was there and came, not only because of him but also to see Lazarus, whom he had raised from the dead.
Kicane tye bot yalwak me kare ducu, i kom jo ducu ma gilwore. 	His mercy extends to those who fear him, from generation to generation.
Laloc mo openye ni, “Lapwony maber, atim gin aŋo wek alim kwo ma pe tum?” 	A certain ruler asked him, “Good teacher, what must I do to inherit eternal life?”
Orommo ki ominne ni gek i dye London ma naka yang rweny woko ki i Uganda 	he met with his brother unexpectedly in the heart of London since he disappeared from Uganda a long time ago
i kare meno, pe gutito bot dano mo lok mo i kom gin ma guneno. 	The disciples kept this to themselves and did not tell anyone at that time what they had seen.
tuur yat man becco mada	this tree's flowers are very beautiful
pyel cuka man i wii lawotte 	lay this sheet on top of the other
gacce pe ber 	her way of looking at things through the angle of the eyes is not good
Ocike ni, Winy ba, pe icitit ki dano mo	“See that you don’t tell this to anyone
abili obinno ka makko dano	a policeman has come to arrest the people 
Pien jami ducu tine kun lubo tam pa Lubaŋa ki mitte. En oyerowa i Kricito pi tamme, wek wan wabed jone, kun onoŋo yam en doŋ oyubo woko con ni, 	to be put into effect when the times reach their fulfillment—to bring unity to all things in heaven and on earth under Christ.
Peya wuniaŋ ce, nyo pe wupo pi mugati abic pi jo alip abic-ci? Yam wucoko ŋide opoŋo aduku adi? 	Do you still not understand? Don’t you remember the five loaves for the five thousand, and how many basketfuls you gathered?
kec tin onekke twatwal oweko tye ka gwello kwon matek kombeddi 	he was so hungry today, that he is eating the food in a hurry now
tin kulune dong ocakko jaa mada 	the river has started today to be very be full and with force
en dok borro dakone twatwal 	he praises his wife too much
kado twerro pworre i dek 	the salt can be sprinkled into the sauce 
Latic-cu odokke iye ni, ‘Omeru doŋ odwogo, woru onekke wod twon mucwe, pien ogame ma kome yot kun kwo.’ 	‘Your brother has come,’ he replied, ‘and your father has killed the fattened calf because he has him back safe and sound.’
“Jo aryo yam gucito ka lega i ot pa Lubaŋa, ŋat acel Laparicayo, ŋat mukene lajog-mucoro. 	“Two men went up to the temple to pray, one a Pharisee and the other a tax collector.
0Ŋat ma maro dano, pe timo gin marac bot dano lawote	The commandments, “You shall not commit adultery,” “You shall not murder,” “You shall not steal,” “You shall not covet,” and whatever other command there may be, are summed up in this one command: “Love your neighbor as yourself.”
wa aa ka jollo wii rwotwa 	we have come from welcoming our chief
yen en aye giwango i lakit yoo moni ci dokko bilo 	it is firewood which is burnt in a certain way to become charcoal
Dano aboro keken gin aye gubinno ka tiyo tic me arododo 	only eight people came to work for the chief
Ka guwinyo lokke oyomo cwinygi, gucako cikke me miye lim	They were delighted to hear this and promised to give him money
pii gunynye i keno 	the water is boiling on the heater 
gwok gin meno ento iŋuti. Ka ce pe ico, ci abibino boti macalo lakwo, ma in pe iŋeyo cawa ma abibino kwede i komi. 	But if you do not wake up, I will come like a thief, and you will not know at what time I will come to you.
aballo caana woko	I have spoiled my watch
man ma okwot madit mape rem noggo pig kom tye ma pong iye 	the scrotum which is swollen, big and painless, has tissue fluki full in it and this is called hydrocele 
apora bot oneko apwoyo	blind copying killed hare
En pe ojolo legawa keken, ento cwinye tye iye matek, mumiyo en gire bino botwu pi mitte kene. 	Thanks be to God, who put into the heart of Titus the same concern I have for you.
dano opong i bar odilo ni nyem 	people have assembled in large numbers in the football field
yuyo lakkii madit i tuko, meno yuc me nek  	throwing such a big stone in play, is a throw for killing
ngat maber 	a good person 
Lok man otimme wek gum ma Lubaŋa ceŋ omiyo ki Abraim Lurok bene gunoŋ pi Yecu Kricito, ka wek wan bene walim Cwiny Maleŋ ma yam giciko pire-ni pi niye. 	The law is not based on faith; on the contrary, it says, “The person who does these things will live by them.”
jane mukenne gibecco mada i kit gi, ento man pe ber I kitte 	some of the slaves are very good in their manners but this one is not good at all
litino cwee mada kace gimatto cak madwong 	the children get very fat if they drink a lot of milk 
ka dok omedde kun loko ni, “Pe dok abipo i kom balgi ki timgi maraco.” 	Then he adds: “Their sins and lawless acts I will remember no more.”
ento alwoŋowu lurema, pien gin ducu ma yam awinyo ki bot Wora doŋ atyeko nyuttiwu. 	I no longer call you servants, because a servant does not know his master’s business
En obedo ka tito lok kun wacci, Dano mo obebino kun lubo kora ma kato an ki dit, ma an pe aromo guŋo piny ka gonyo del war tyene. 	And this was his message: “After me comes the one more powerful than I, the straps of whose sandals I am not worthy to stoop down and untie.
kun imiyo ŋec me lar bot rokke ma bino pi weko balgi, 	to give his people the knowledge of salvation through the forgiveness of their sins,
En bene mutittiwa pi mar ma wutye kwede i Cwiny Maleŋ. 	You learned it from Epaphras, our dear fellow servant, who is a faithful minister of Christ on our behalf,
myen kwonne mayom 	make a nice soft bread
layi pa abili myerro nine ducu giyubbo maleng 	the police line must always be kept clean
takko wii kongo me abila	to remove a small quantity of beer for tasting
gweng matye i nyimmi twerro yerre 	the stones in the simsim can be picked
Bot ŋat mukene en miyo mot me tiyo taŋo, bot ŋat mukene mot me tito lok pa Lubaŋa, bot ŋat mukene miyo ryeko me poko kin cwiny mapatpat, bot ŋat mukene miyo dumo leb mapatpat, bot ŋat mukene miyo ryeko me gonyo leb mapatpat. 	to another miraculous powers, to another prophecy, to another distinguishing between spirits, to another speaking in different kinds of tongues, and to still another the interpretation of tongues.
I kare ma Yecu obedo ka wot kun rabo dog nam Galilaya, ci oneno omego aryo, Cimon ma gilwoŋo Petero ki ominne Anderiya, ka gitye ka bolo obwo recgi i nam	As Jesus was walking beside the Sea of Galilee, he saw two brothers, Simon called Peter and his brother Andrew
Ka wugwoko cikka, wubibedo i marra, kit macalo ceŋ agwoko cik pa Abana, abedo i marre. 	Now remain in my love.
Juda Lakeriot, ma en dano acel ma i kin jo apar wiye aryo-ni, ocito bot ajwagi madito pa Lubaŋa pi miyo Yecu i ciŋgi. 	Then Judas Iscariot, one of the Twelve, went to the chief priests to betray Jesus to them.
jang yatte twerro nalle oo wa piny ma miyo dano rommo pwonno nyigge 	the branch of the tree can be bent down to enable people to pick its seeds or fruits
dek mamit en aye labol me teddo maber 	good food is the example of good cooking 
jammi agwarra pe konynyo 	improvised things are of no use
lapene ogut caa 	there is a person with a protruding navel
kal me tobi dong obiir woko 	the millet for leaven is germinating
Wun pe wuwaco ni, ‘Pud odoŋ dwe aŋwen me cako kac’? Atittiwu ni, wutiŋ waŋwu malo, wunen kit ma doŋ poto ocek kwede me akaya. 	“My food,” said Jesus, “is to do the will of him who sent me and to finish his work.
ka ilego ni omiini gin mo miini ma titkii mo pien en ladidi twatwal 	when you ask him to give you something, he will give you very little because he is a miser 
Ka luor doŋ gudok paco, gunoŋo latic doŋ kome yot. 	Then the men who had been sent returned to the house and found the servant well.
giwaci ni olkii kayo dano ka ilutto tyenni I pii ma gin tye iye 	it is said that olkii does bite people if you enter the water where they are 
gumyello piny ni teere 	they danced throughout the night 
rec man twerro pedde maber mada 	the fish can be cut and opened widely 
rummo cong	to kneel on the knees
meny pa kot	ightning of the rain 
litino ononggo gitye ka tukko i wii cere ci guceer gupotto gucito wai lug piny kuno 	the children were playing on top of the hill and they sided and fell right down the slope of the hill there
lak palaa oluu, nyo oligu pe dong ngollo gin moo 	he went for good  
Ka Petero opoŋ ki cwiny Maleŋ, ci owaco botgi ni, “Wun lulo lwak ki ludoŋo, 	Then Peter, filled with the Holy Spirit, said to them: “Rulers and elders of the people!
ka ngat ma cammo cukari madowong twatwal ci nonggo twoo cukari  	if one eats too much sugar she gets 'sugar disease', diabetes
willa lalek pany manyen meera dong obar woko 	buy for me a new pestle, mine is now split
ci lwak ducu gubino bote, ocako pwonyogi. 	A large crowd came to him, and he began to teach them.
wubineno kome kunnu, kit ma yam en otito botwu-ni.” 	There you will see him, just as he told you.’”
Ci Yecu ogamo ni, “Wun yalwak me kare man niyewu pe, kitwu bene doŋ oballe woko, abibedo kwedwu nio wa awene? Wukel en bota kany.” 	I brought him to your disciples, but they could not heal him.”
Yecu ogudo ciŋe, ci two lyeto ocaŋ woko ki i kome, oa malo ocako gwoko Yecu. 	When Jesus came into Peter’s house, he saw Peter’s mother-in-law lying in bed with a fever.
alii pa kwarrogi en aye lye kakello too i komgi 	the enmity of their grand father is the thing which is bringing death on them
I nino mo acel ka Yecu tye ka pwonyo dano i ot pa Lubaŋa kun tito lok me kwena maber, ajwagi ki lupwony-cik ki ludoŋo gubino, 	One day as Jesus was teaching the people in the temple courts and proclaiming the good news, the chief priests and the teachers of the law, together with the elders, came up to him.
pitto gweni 	rearing chicken 
Kumeno, utmegina, wun bene yam wuto tuŋ bot cik pi Kricito ma wuribbe i kome-ni, wek wudok bot ŋat mukene, en aye ŋat ma yam gicere woko ki i kin jo muto, wek wanyak nyig pi Lubaŋa. 	But if her husband dies, she is released from that law and is not an adulteress if she marries another man.
geng donggi wek awiny ci inenno 	open your mouth for me to hear and you will see, in other words, he does not want her to speak
litino gitye ka wotto tum wii ot 	the children are pulling out grass from the root of a house 
en obeddo nama adek i peny	he was the third in the examination
kun giloko ki dwan maloŋo ni, “Latin romo ma gineko-ni en aye ma myero me noŋo twero, lonyo, ryeko ki teko, woro ki deyo kacel ki pwoc!” 	In a loud voice they were saying: “Worthy is the Lamb, who was slain, to receive power and wealth and wisdom and strength and honor and glory and praise!”
watye ka kuro Lalarwa ma bia ki kunnu, en aye Rwotwa Yecu Kricito. 	But our citizenship is in heaven
dano guukke i kom lakwoo ci gugoyo gunekko woko 	the people fell upon the thief and beat him to death
wotto ma tanynyo korre atanynya 	walks with his chest pushed out in a boastful manner
Cutcut oa malo ocuŋ i nyimgi, okwanyo gin ma onoŋo obuto iye odok paco kun pako Lubaŋa. 	But I want you to know that the Son of Man has authority on earth to forgive sins.” So he said to the paralyzed man, “I tell you, get up, take your mat and go home.”
in mono onoigo itye kwene, ikare ma gwok kayo latinni? 	where were you then, when the dong was bitting the child? 
odoo man kidi mo tuur woko oyot, pe twerro goyo gin mo 	this stick is small, it breaks easily, it cannot beat anything
“An Alupa ki Omega”, man Rwot Lubaŋa ma owaco, en Lubaŋa ma tye, dok ma yam onoŋo tye con, doki ma bibino, en Won Twer Ducu. 	“I am the Alpha and the Omega,” says the Lord God, “who is, and who was, and who is to come, the Almighty.”
ngii kace pulle gibecco	inspect if the groundnuts are good
nywallo latin	delivering a child  
laor pa rwot otitto kwene? 	where has the chief's messenger gone? 
dogge bedi pwa pwa 	his mouth is overflowing with interesting talk
En owaccigi ni, “Wubol obwo tuŋ malacuc me yeya, ci wubinoŋo.” Gubolo, tiŋo obwo oŋayogi pi pol rec. 	He called out to them, “Friends, haven’t you any fish?” “No,” they answered.
I kare ma onoŋo atye i Damaciko, laloc mo me dul lobo ma tye i te loc pa kabaka Areta obedo ka kiyo gaŋ meno ni wek emaka, 	The God and Father of the Lord Jesus, who is to be praised forever, knows that I am not lying.
lwog nying latin acel acel wek inen ngat ma pe 	call the name of each child in order to find out who is not there
bok anyogi wek wamwoddi  	steam the maize so that we may eat
cwinynye oton mada i kommi 	he was very much annoyed with you 
lwong lamiru okel pii ki welo me lwok 	call the slave to bring water for the guests for bathing
dano ma lagad twatwal nino ducu cwee mada 	a person who eats excessively always becomes very fat
yuc atata me lakkii kama pe ineno pe ber 	throwing stones where you do not see is not good
Wun mon wumine kenwu i te loc pa cogwu, macalo wumine kenwu bot Rwot. 	Submit to one another out of reverence for Christ.
aballo mutoka meera woko	I have destroyed my motor car
Ka atimo man pi twerona kena, abinoŋo bakacic, ento ka atimo ma kun pe amito, noŋo atye ka cobo tic ma gimiya. 	If I preach voluntarily, I have a reward; if not voluntarily, I am simply discharging the trust committed to me.
cukane laac mada rommo ummo kitanda 	the heel is wide enough to cover the bed
Pi meno, ŋat mo pe myero oŋol kop i komwu pi lok kom cam nyo ginamata, kadi pi nino madito, nyo por dwe, nyo pi cabit. 	And having disarmed the powers and authorities, he made a public spectacle of them, triumphing over them by the cross.
giwacce ni ojwaa wii meja maleng, ci jugge ajugga pe ngeyo kit ma myerro etii kwedde dok bene ki gin angoo ma myerro etii kwedde 	he was told to polish the top of the table but he did not know how to do it and with what to use to polish it and instead was only moving about doing nothing 
ka omatto arege ci komme nyongge woko 	when he has taken the waragi gin his body becomes very weak
dekke dong liyo twatwal myero dong gimat amatta pe gicam ki kwon  	the sauce is too watery, it needs to be drunk, rather than to be eaten with kwon
borro dyeggi ki dyangngine ni gibecco katto pa dano mukene ducu 	he praises his goats and cattle that they are better than people
nonggo yat manyen pe yot 	to discover a new drug is not easy 
lok pa jo aryp pe doko pa jo adek	a matter between two persons is not a matter for three people
aecitto i taun 	I am going to the town 
omiyo nucu mugati keken 	he gave half a loaf only 
tyengi cengo 	they have short legs
Ka gunyiko cok ki paco ma onoŋo gicito iye-ni, Yecu otimo macalo mito kato akata ki wotte, 	And beginning with Moses and all the Prophets, he explained to them what was said in all the Scriptures concerning himself.
twon gweno labok man dong orommo me acamma 	this brownish yellow cock is now ready to be eaten 
gallo dek mape giteddo maber  	despising the sauce which was not well cooked 
Ka Yecu ocuŋ, ci owacci, “Wulwoŋe obin.” Gucako lwoŋo lawaŋe-oto ni, “Doŋ idi cwinyi, a malo, olwoŋi.” 	Jesus stopped and said, “Call him.” So they called to the blind man, “Cheer up! On your feet! He’s calling you.”
waarro jami woko ki i ot	to remove things from the house
Utmegina, ka abio botwu kunnu ma kun noŋo adumo leb mapatpat, abibedo ki kony aŋo botwu, ka pe akelo botwu lok pa Lubaŋa ma ginyutta, nyo ŋec mo, nyo lok mo ma Lubaŋa omiya me atita, nyo pwony mo? 	Now, brothers and sisters, if I come to you and speak in tongues, what good will I be to you, unless I bring you some revelation or knowledge or prophecy or word of instruction?
en pe mitto ric i dog tic 	he does not want pushing or to be pushed to work 
Gin ducu gugamo ni, “Doŋ in i Wod pa Lubaŋa do?” Yecu ogamo ni, “Wun wuwaco ni an a en.” 	They all asked, “Are you then the Son of God?” He replied, “You say that I am.”
Kadi wa i kare ma atye i Tecalonika wucwalla kony ma mitte tyen aryo kulu. 	Moreover, as you Philippians know, in the early days of your acquaintance with the gospel, when I set out from Macedonia, not one church shared with me in the matter of giving and receiving, except you only;
danone pe mitto nyutte kama leng 	the man does not want to openly appear
obinno ma wangge col ni cuc	he came with a deep frown and dark face
Doŋ kodi ma gicoyo okir i kin okuto, man aye dano ma winyo lok, ento paro lok me lobo man, ki maro lonyo, diyo lok woko, ci miyo pe nyak. 	The seed falling among the thorns refers to someone who hears the word, but the worries of this life and the deceitfulness of wealth choke the word, making it unfruitful.
laworo wanenno lakalatwe layibbe ma wotto dok tung poto ceng 	yesterday we saw a shooting star which was moving westwards
wii meja gijwayo mapwot mada 	the top of the table has been highly polished and very smooth 
tin gitye ka yokke mada i kot 	today they are clashing very badly in court
lum otwii ni yuk 	the grass has overgrown here 
Ka waweke kit meno, ci dano biye en, Luroma bibino, gibiketo kabedowa maleŋ ki rokwa woko.” 	But some of them went to the Pharisees and told them what Jesus had done.
Ka yam pe wubedo lugen i kom jami pa dano mukene, aŋa ma bimiyowu jamiwu kikome? 	So if you have not been trustworthy in handling worldly wealth, who will trust you with true riches?
ladit kong ibog tacci 	Sir, just touch your hip pocket, this is actually a request that he should give them some money
yaittlapirti ocorro lum oo piny ni nam 	the storm pushed down the grass and made it lie down 
Latin opyello cet i wii kabuto 	the child has defaecated on the bed 
Pien ka watimo bal akaka ma doŋ noŋo watyeko limo ŋec i kom lok me ada, gitum mo pe dok odoŋ ma gityero pi balwa. 	If we deliberately keep on sinning after we have received the knowledge of the truth, no sacrifice for sins is left,
wii ngotte itte 	the moutain can be climbed
ojinynyo wangge matek i komme 	he screwed his eyes as he looked sternly at him 
Cutcut ma Yecu pud tye ka lok-ki, Juda otugi tuc	Just as he was speaking, Judas, one of the Twelve, appeared
Catan dok otere malo, onyutte ker ducu ma i wi lobo i kine me kare matidi mo, 	The devil led him up to a high place and showed him in an instant all the kingdoms of the world.
Ento ka pe aŋeyo leb ma dano mo-ni tye ka loko, abedo macalo larok bote, ki en bene bedo macalo larok bota. 	If then I do not grasp the meaning of what someone is saying, I am a foreigner to the speaker, and the speaker is a foreigner to me.
lok ma gakko dano  	words that mislead the people
pii mac i kom yat man 	make fire by drilling this wood 
yuu taane gicel keken 	inhale or take a puff at the tobacco once only
pien gitumme acel-lu omiyo jo ma en olonyogi bedo leŋ gudoko jo mabeco muteggi matwal. 	For by one sacrifice he has made perfect forever those who are being made holy.
com kongone ki coda wek pe obed makec twatwal 	add soda into the alcohol to make it less strong
gwogi bene onoŋo gibino ginaŋo waŋ burre. 	and longing to eat what fell from the rich man’s table
tal tye kwene me rubbu winyo 	where is the stick for transfixing the birds? 
Cik lulonyo me kare man ni guwek wakke, dok bene pe guket gengi i kom lonyo ma pe genne, ento guket gengi i kom Lubaŋa ma miyowa jami ducu mabup ma yomo cwinywa. 	which God will bring about in his own time—God, the blessed and only Ruler, the King of kings and Lord of lords,
opotto oturro bade woko ononggo tye ka lyerre  	he fell and broke his arm when he was swinging
Waraga man oa ki bot Paulo gin ki Silvano, ka Temceo. Bot lwak jo muye Kricito ma gibedo i Tecalonika ma gitye i Lubaŋa Won ki Rwotwa Yecu Kricito: 	Paul, Silas and Timothy, To the church of the Thessalonians in God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ:
kaka acel acel tye ki mwocgi ma gin cello, ma gingeyogi kwedde 	a clan has mwoc, which they suddenly say, when they are excited, 
otanynye obinno ma lyet macallo mac tet 	he burst out with rage and came out with furore which is hot like burning furnace
cwinyne utte ni myero etim gin mo 	he feels an urge to do something
coo wang coo me dong nngom mewa i waraga kany 	draw or mark a boundary of our land on the paper here
moro wotto kama bor ma gilubbe alubba 	the soldier ants travel a long distance one following another
man dano ma obangge mape myero imii ni otimmi gin mo 	this is a person of unstable mind whom you should not give anything to do for you
jwik cukari ma itye ka mattone ni pien itye i twoo me cukari 	reduce the amount of the sugar that you take because you have diabetes
gitye ka rweyo tyen lacoo ma owil 	they are massaging the leg of a man who has sprained his ankle
dyel pa angaa ma ojony ni gek gek-ki?  	whose goat which is quite emaciated?
cam magic an pe amitto 	I do not want cold food 
aparro mada pi litino ka gitye maber 	I do worry very much about the children if they are well
pwony en aye tic maber ma myero dano mapol gukwany 	teaching is the best protession that many people should take 
Okwanyogi woko ki i Ejipt kun tiyo taŋo ki lanyut mapol i Ejipt ki i Nam Makwar ki i tim mwaka pyeraŋwen. 	He led them out of Egypt and performed wonders and signs in Egypt, at the Red Sea and for forty years in the wilderness.
Ka en Daudi aye yam olwoŋe ni Rwot, ci en dok bedo lakwarre niŋniŋ?” 	“‘The Lord said to my Lord: “Sit at my right hand until I put your enemies under your feet.”’
I kare meno Juda Lakeriot, ma en dano acel ma i kin jo apar wiye aryo-ni, ocito bot ajwagi madito pa Lubaŋa, 	Then one of the Twelve—the one called Judas Iscariot—went to the chief priests
awobe gucito ka gweyo odilo 	the boys went to play the football 
gweni ni twerro pitte ki nyim 	the chicken can be fed with simsim
karatac ma giwmonno i kor ot twerro gwenne 	the papers plastered on the wall can be peeled off 
pii lye ka mol 	water is flowing 
danone meer mada ki dano 	the man is very friendly and approachable 
I kare ma Petero pud tye ka loko lok meno, Cwiny Maleŋ opye i kom jo ducu ma gubedo ka winyo lokke. 	While Peter was still speaking these words, the Holy Spirit came on all who heard the message.
Yecu odok iye ni, “Dano ma tye ka gweyo dek i atabo acel kwedani aye bidoba. 	Jesus replied, “The one who has dipped his hand into the bowl with me will betray me.
Lupur gucako lok kekengi ni, ‘Man aye doŋ lale lim	“But the tenants said to one another, ‘This is the heir
yaar bonggi ma gilwokko woko wii mwodo wek otwoo iye 	spread the clothes that have been washed outside on the grass to dry there
wany pok labolone ka dong icam 	peel the skin of the banana and then eat
Ot pa Lubaŋa kono twero ribbe niŋniŋ ki cal jogi? Pien wan aye wabedo ot pa Lubaŋa makwo	What harmony is there between Christ and Belial? Or what does a believer have in common with an unbeliever?
raggo dong kika ne aragga 	making the door roughly or clumsily 
oyoo guny woko i odde 	the rat disappears into its hole
dano adii ma gucitto ka ywaane? 	how many people went for the tung of war? 
Ento wonne owaco bot luticce ni, ‘Wukel jor maber makato ducu oyot, wuruk i kome	“But the father said to his servants, ‘Quick! Bring the best robe and put it on him
Lamalaika me abicelle oonyo gin ma i i atabone woko i kulu madit Euprate, ci piine otwo woko pi yubo yo pi wot pa luker ma gia ki yo tuŋ wokceŋ. 	The sixth angel poured out his bowl on the great river Euphrates, and its water was dried up to prepare the way for the kings from the East.
pik odilo man me agoya koni otyeno 	inflate this ball to play with this afternoon
Pi meno, wun utmegina maleŋ ma Lubaŋa olwoŋowu kacel kweda, koŋ wutam lok i kom Yecu ma en lakwana dok ajwaka madit me niye ma wan watuco. 	Therefore, holy brothers and sisters, who share in the heavenly calling, fix your thoughts on Jesus, whom we acknowledge as our apostle and high priest.
dano tin gitye ka myello myel akero kun giwayo kwedde pien gunekko labwor	the people are dancing fighting dance because they have killed a lion 
Ŋat ma Lubaŋa ooro loko lok pa Lubaŋa, pien Lubaŋa pe miyo Cwiny kun pimo apima. 	Whoever has accepted it has certified that God is truthful.
latin akwarra ka dotto cak maber ci pe kok	when a neonate suckles well she does not cry
rwak tyenni i waar 	push your foot into the shoe
itte lit  	he has earache 
“Utmego, wun likwayo ma i kaka pa Abraim, ki jo mukene ma i kinwu ma gilworo Lubaŋa, wan aye gicwalo botwa lok man me larre. 	“Fellow children of Abraham and you God-fearing Gentiles, it is to us that this message of salvation has been sent.
nenno dyang mene maber ma loyo ducu 	to choose which cattle that is better than all of them
pi meno wugwok kitwu, kun wuloyo mitiwu kenwu, wek wumine i lego Lubaŋa. 	The end of all things is near
wotto ganynyo aganynya callo bur tye i gwinynye	walks as if being prevented by sore in the perineum
pundi layub caa tye kwene?  	where is the watch repairer?
gaa pe myerro ki nyako 	being obstinate and stubborn is not good for a girl 
paco dong oballe woko 	the home is now destroyed,in other words, there is no peace except trouble at home now
wa a odiko ki Gulu  	we rose early in the morning from Gulu
ka ibeddo ka dotto lem dano atatattas ceng mo inoggo twoo nyac abaji 	you will one day get syphilis if you keep on kissing people 
Waŋeyo ni dano ma Lubaŋa onywalo pe dok bedo ka timo bal, ento Wod pa Lubaŋa gwoke maber, miyo Larac pe gude. 	We know that anyone born of God does not continue to sin; the One who was born of God keeps them safe, and the evil one cannot harm them.
maarro cammo moo twatwal omiyo ocwee twatwal 	loves to eat fats that is why he is very fat
Gin ma doŋ ityeko winyo ki bota i nyim lucaden mapol, in bene myero itit bot jo ma genne ma giromo pwonyo ki jo mukene. 	You then, my son, be strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus.
ka warumo coŋwa i dog nam, walego, wacikke kwedgi. 	All of them, including wives and children, accompanied us out of the city, and there on the beach we knelt to pray.
Kadi bed tye gin mogo ma gilwoŋo ni lubaŋa i polo nyo i lobo, kit macalo tye lwak lubaŋa ki lwak rwodi mapol mapatpat-ti, 	For even if there are so-called gods, whether in heaven or on earth (as indeed there are many “gods” and many “lords”),
Pien macalo pi dano acel ma pe obedo ki winy omiyo dano mapol ata gudoko lubalo, kit meno bene pi winy pa dano acel jo mapol ata gibikwanogi ni kitgi atir. 	Consequently, just as one trespass resulted in condemnation for all people, so also one righteous act resulted in justification and life for all people.
rwot me Denmark  	the King of Denmark
ka ce wudokka iye, ci doŋ abitito botwu gin mumiyo atimo gin magi. 	Jesus replied, “I will also ask you one question
dako nywal ki nyekke 	a co-wife is assisted by a co-wife when she is delivering
Festo owacci, “Kabaka Agripa ki wun ducu ma wutye kwedwa kany, wun doŋ wuneno dano man ma lwak Lujudaya ducu gubako doggi bota pire i Jerucalem wa ki kany bene, kun gidaŋŋe ni pe myero obed kwo. 	Festus said: “King Agrippa, and all who are present with us, you see this man! The whole Jewish community has petitioned me about him in Jerusalem and here in Caesarea, shouting that he ought not to live any longer.
ŋat mo pe ma ŋeyo Wod, kono Won keken, dok bene ŋat mo pe ma ŋeyo Won kono Wod keken ki ŋat ma Wod oyero me nyuto Won bote. 	No one knows the Son except the Father, and no one knows the Father except the Son and those to whom the Son chooses to reveal him.
ento omine kene bot ŋat ma ŋolo kop atir. 	When they hurled their insults at him, he did not retaliate; when he suffered, he made no threats
wallo lum ma i wang pii 	to gather and to remove the grass from the water well
Kadi bed giŋeyo cik pa Lubaŋa ni jo ma timo gin macalo meno gibito, ento gin pe gitimo jami macalo meno atima keken, gipwoyo bene jo ma tye ka timone.	they have no understanding, no fidelity, no love, no mercy.
Macalo yam doŋ wucer kacel ki Kricito, wuket cwinywu doŋ i kom jami ma tye malo, ka ma Kricito tye iye i kabedo me deyo i ŋet Lubaŋa tuŋ acuc. 	To this end I strenuously contend with all the energy Christ so powerfully works in me.
Okeny dano ma cek ni jut ma ka tye i kin dano ci pe twerro nenne 	Okeny is a very short person and when he is among others he cannot be seen
dano ma nok mada ma gitye ki olang acel acel ento ducu mukene gitye ki olang aryo aryo 	very few people have one kidney but the majority have two kidneys
boo ma otwoo twerro ginynye maber 	dried cowpeas leaves can be broken into small pieces by rubbing it 
Pi Kricito omiyo cwinya yom pi goro mapatpat ma atye kwede, ki pi yet, ki pi can, ki pi peko mogo ma giuna kwede, ki peko ma diya matek	But he said to me, “My grace is sufficient for you, for my power is made perfect in weakness.” Therefore I will boast all the more gladly about my weaknesses, so that Christ’s power may rest on me.
Dok owacce ni, “Adada awacciwu ni, wubineno polo kun oyabbe, kun lumalaika pa Lubaŋa giito dok gilor piny i kom Wod pa dano.”	Then Nathanael declared, “Rabbi, you are the Son of God; you are the king of Israel.”
Lubaŋa won kuc ma ocero Rwotwa Yecu Kricito ki i kin jo muto, ma en aye lakwat romi madit, pi remo me gicikke ma ri nakanaka, 	Now may the God of peace, who through the blood of the eternal covenant brought back from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great Shepherd of the sheep,
I kare ma Yecu tye i Betania i ot pa Cimon ladobo, 	While Jesus was in Bethany in the home of Simon the Leper,
Kit lok pa dano macalo meno aye bimiyo anyatte, ento pira kena pe abinyatte, ento kono pi gorona aye keken. 	was caught up to paradise and heard inexpressible things, things that no one is permitted to tell.
piny oruu 	it is dawn 
wangge beddo ni pit-pit, pit pit wang 	looking at things with great desire, lustful
Pe dok abiduro lwak lok mapol kwedwu, pien lalo lobo man tye ka bino. 	I have told you now before it happens, so that when it does happen you will believe.
Doŋ ineno ni niyene yam ocobbe ki tic, 	You see that his faith and his actions were working together, and his faith was made complete by what he did.
Ka ŋat mo ite tye myero owiny lok man. 	Whoever has ears, let them hear.
dano mape tye ki maar nino ducu beddo kene kene	a person who has no love always stays by himself  
Adada awacciwu ni, latic pe bedo dit makato laditte, ŋat ma gioro pe dit kato ŋat ma oore. 	I have set you an example that you should do as I have done for you.
Wod pa dano tye ka wot kit macalo yam gicoyo i kome-ni	The Son of Man will go just as it is written about him
Doŋ kit macalo pud watye ki kare-ni, myero watiyu gin maber bot dano ducu, makato ducu myero watiyu bot utmegiwa ma guye Kricito. 	Let us not become weary in doing good, for at the proper time we will reap a harvest if we do not give up.
gang man twerro rumme ki eel maber mada 	the home can be well surrounded by a fence
Ento Festo ogamo ni gitye ka gwoko Paulo i Cecaria, en bene emito cito kunnu i kare macok-ki. 	Festus answered, “Paul is being held at Caesarea, and I myself am going there soon.
Dano ma gua ki i kin lwak me wi lobo ki i kaka mapatpat ki leb-gu ki i rok mapatpat gibineno komgi muto pi nino adek ki nucu, kun pe giye ni giyikgi i lyel. 	For three and a half days some from every people, tribe, language and nation will gaze on their bodies and refuse them burial.
collo mucoro en aye ngat acel i kom yoo madit ma gabumente nonggo tye lim madit me tic kwede 	paying taxes is one of the important ways in which the government gets funds for running its business
Lwak lutwo mapol onoŋo buto iye, lutowaŋ, luŋolo ki lugoro, [ma gikuro twagge me pii. 	Now there is in Jerusalem near the Sheep Gate a pool, which in Aramaic is called Bethesda and which is surrounded by five covered colonnades.
Doŋ ka wubalo kit man bot utmegiwu ma niyegi goro, ka dok wubalo tamgi ma nyuto botgi balgi ma pud goro, noŋo wubalo i kom Kricito. 	When you sin against them in this way and wound their weak conscience, you sin against Christ.
mitto binno ci kat woko ka dong ijir iye kuno 	if you feel like sneezing, go out and sneeze there 
cukke ited cam kadi bed komi wac ki litino 	try to cook food for the children even if you feel lazy
ot beddone lac ni taam 	the sitting room is very wide 
opuny tyenni kak mada imitto kkii agwaya wek ibeddo ka jwayo kwede	your heels cracks constantly and you need to rub it with a fine soft stone all the time
oyo yogi woko i wii oduur	throwing out the rubbish to rubbish pit
pata meggi me doggola man dok kok twatwal ka giyabbo, kel moo iton iye wek pe gukokki 	these hinges make too much noises when the door is being opened, bring oil and put into them to stop the noise 
Pien Rwot yam ocikowa kun wacci, ‘Aketo in me bedo ceŋ bot Lurok, wek imi larre oo wa i agikki piny ducu.’ ” 	For this is what the Lord has commanded us: “‘I have made you a light for the Gentiles, that you may bring salvation to the ends of the earth.’”
Ci laco ma gikolo owaco bot Pilipo ni, “Alegi, titta, lanebi oloko lok man i kom aŋa, i kome kene nyo i kom ŋat mukene?” 	The eunuch asked Philip, “Tell me, please, who is the prophet talking about, himself or someone else?”
Ci oketo ciŋe i komgi, ka doŋ oa woko ki kunnu. 	When he had placed his hands on them, he went on from there.
I kine okogweno, Yecu oa obino botgi kun woto i wi nam ki tyene. 	Immediately Jesus made the disciples get into the boat and go on ahead of him to the other side, while he dismissed the crowd.
Pe atye ka waco ni doŋ anoŋo, nyo ni doŋ ao iye, ento pud amedde me wot anyim kun atemo matek me mako gin ma Kricito Yecu doŋ omaka pire. 	and so, somehow, attaining to the resurrection from the dead.
reg nyim man maber ci leny 	grind this simsim well and it will liquilize
pe nino ka gad mo ma twarro tye ka ngette	he does not sleep if there is somebody near him who snores 
gigukko lukwoo ka kwoo	the thieves were taken by surprise when stealing 
yecce tye caa, ma myero en oting 	his load that he should carry is there
lacooni tye mere ka pongge nono ni komme lit kun kono komme yot woko liweng, dag tic mitto mere citto ka nenno odilo 	the man is pretending that he is ill yet he is quite healthy, he does not want to work, he wants to go to watch the football 
pe iget iye ki lok marac macalo kitmeno	do not annoy him with such bad words
Ento wumak gin ma wutye kwede-ni aye matek likiŋ, waŋ ma an adwogo. 	except to hold on to what you have until I come.’
Doŋ i kare me cer dako-nu bibedo pa aŋa i kin co abiro-nu? Pien gin ducu onoŋo gubedo kwede.” 	Finally, the woman died.
Ee pe wacce 	it cannot be expressed
ci wubirwatte iye ki laco mo ma oyeyo agulu pii, en aye wulub kore. 	Follow him.
gam buk en icikwan 	receive this book and go and read it
nyeeri itimmo ngoo kany? 	you, you fellow what are you doing here? 
Ginanena mo madit adada onen i polo, dako mo ma onoŋo oruko ceŋ, kun dwe tye i te tyene, ki lalukana ma onoŋo en oruko i wiye obedo lakalatwe apar wiye aryo. 	A great sign appeared in heaven: a woman clothed with the sun, with the moon under her feet and a crown of twelve stars on her head.
Dano me aryo ki me adekke bene ducu kit meno, nio wa i kom dano me abirone. 	“Teacher,” they said, “Moses told us that if a man dies without having children, his brother must marry the widow and raise up offspring for him.
Ento an kikoma bene aromo bedo ki gen macalo meno	For it is we who are the circumcision, we who serve God by his Spirit, who boast in Christ Jesus, and who put no confidence in the flesh—
Gin ducu ma wutiyo, kadi ki i lok nyo i tic mogo, wutigi i nyiŋ Rwot Yecu, kun wumiyo pwoc bot Lubaŋa Won wok ki bote. 	Let the message of Christ dwell among you richly as you teach and admonish one another with all wisdom through psalms, hymns, and songs from the Spirit, singing to God with gratitude in your hearts.
anyira cukul gukwoyo kitambara meja ma becco mada ma guketto alugo lugo orummo donggi ducu 	the school girls have made very beautiful table clothes with tassel put round all the edges
otigoni twerro gwerre maber 	the lady fingers (okra) can be well cut into pieces
Nio koni yam pe wulego gin mo i nyiŋa	So with you: Now is your time of grief, but I will see you again and you will rejoice, and no one will take away your joy.
wiye pek 	he is dull
nga ma ngeyo oc me pii i poto atture? 	Who knows about watering the flower garden?
Yecu odok iye botgi ni, “Wun pe wukwano gin ma Daudi otiyo, i kare ma onoŋo kec oneke, en kacel ki jo ma onoŋo gitye kwede? 	When the Pharisees saw this, they said to him, “Look! Your disciples are doing what is unlawful on the Sabbath.”
lok me robbo dog dano 	the matter for provoking the people
(kun Yecu kikome pe obatija dano, kono lupwonnyene aye gubatijagi), 	Now Jesus learned that the Pharisees had heard that he was gaining and baptizing more disciples than John—
yang pud oninno aninna man dong tye ka coo me makko kwan matek 	he used to be sleeping all the time now he is waking up to study hard
wii told pamba 	twist or spin a cotton thread
ka nammo maber pe kany 	there is no good place for passing time here 
ngadde matek wek i pwon mayembe ira 	stretch up hard and pick for me the mangoes
oywec got becco mada ma katto oywec mukene 	the brooms obtained from the mountainous area are much better than any other brooms 
anyirane gimeer mada 	the girls love one another very much
jinynyo wang i kom dano ka gibinno ka nenni pe ber 	to screw up eyes at the people when they come to see you is not good 
pe ingoo kommi, wan ducu warom kwedgi i dongge  	do not fear or be frightened, we are the same as they are in boxing
Iyo, wan myero doŋ wanyiku cok i nyim komker pa Lubaŋa ki tekcwiny, ka ma kica tye iye, wek otimwa kica, wanoŋ bene kica ma konyowa i kare ma mitte.	Let us then approach God’s throne of grace with confidence, so that we may receive mercy and find grace to help us in our time of need.
komme wac pe mitto pur 	he is very lazy, he does not want to cultivate the ground
Ento kiniga omako ladit me kacokke, pien Yecu ocaŋo dano i ceŋ cabit. Owaco bot lwak ni, “Tye nino abicel ma myero giti iye tic	Indignant because Jesus had healed on the Sabbath, the synagogue leader said to the people, “There are six days for work
atimmowu kica pien an aber	I have forgiven you because I am good
anyena en aye matye ka teddo 	the bride is the one who is cooking
Petero openyo ni, “Rwot, ibolo carolok man botwa keken, nyo bot dano ducu?” 	Peter asked, “Lord, are you telling this parable to us, or to everyone?”
pien en bibedo madit i nyim Rwot. En pe bimato koŋo vino kadi gin ma mero dano	for he will be great in the sight of the Lord
danone doki lapiya twatwal 	the man is a great instigator 
pe winynyo lok maber ma gipwonynye kwede 	does not hear well what he is being taught 
motoka yoke mada i akara kara yoone	the cars always have collisions at the fork of the road
Lucadukayo mogo gubino bot Yecu, gin aye jo ma onoŋo giwacci jo muto pe gicer. 	Some of the Sadducees, who say there is no resurrection, came to Jesus with a question.
Otto nen calla wonne kikomme 	Otto looks exactly like his father
tir kitti ka imitti ibed maber ki dano	change your manners if you want people to get on well with you 
pe amitto nyig malakwangnyo kono potte keken 	I do not like seeds of malakwang, except it's leaves
oweko Najaret, ci ocito obedo i Kapernaum ma tye i dog nam, i lobo Jabulon ki Naputali, 	Leaving Nazareth, he went and lived in Capernaum, which was by the lake in the area of Zebulun and Naphtali—
pien pe dok gitwero to, doŋ girom ki lumalaika	and they can no longer die; for they are like the angels
gilwongge ni myerro dong odwog gang ka nyom ento en obwonne woko ni en pudi latin peya erommo nyom 	he was called to return home to get married but he said he was not yet mature enough to marry
Wutyeko doŋ winyo lok i kom kwona macon i kare ma onoŋo pud alubo dini pa Lujudaya, kit ma abedo ka libo kwede jo muye Lubaŋa, kun atimo bwami i komgi, dok atemme mada me nekogi woko liweŋ. 	I did not receive it from any man, nor was I taught it; rather, I received it by revelation from Jesus Christ.
tipone obinno i lek 	his ghost came in the dream
Pien dano ye ki cwinye, en aye miyo gikwane ni kite atir, ka dok tuco ki doge, ka doŋ miyo Lubaŋa lare. 	If you declare with your mouth, “Jesus is Lord,” and believe in your heart that God raised him from the dead, you will be saved.
Doŋ onen maber ni, gin ma en otimo pe okemo lumalaika, ento okemo likwayo pa Abraim. 	For surely it is not angels he helps, but Abraham’s descendants.
Ci cutcut ladobo obino bote, orumo coŋe piny i nyime kun wacce ni, “Ladit, ka imito, itwero lonya.” 	When Jesus came down from the mountainside, large crowds followed him.
man en aye dwee me abicel me mwaka man	this is the sixth month of this year
Cimon Petero ogwele, owacce ni, “Tucciwa ŋat ma en oloko i kome.” 	One of them, the disciple whom Jesus loved, was reclining next to him.
cwal awobe abicel gubin ka cwallo motoka	send six boys to come to push the car
yat ma gipitto nyigi nyigi pe donggo maber ento jwir woko 	the trees that are planted closely together do not grow well but become stunted
ruu piny ki ruu piny latin no tiko koko, gin angoo ma yello? 	day by day that child is crying, what troubles him?
Gin ducu ma wupenyo i legawu, wubinoŋo, ka ce wutye ki niye.” 	Jesus replied, “Truly I tell you, if you have faith and do not doubt, not only can you do what was done to the fig tree, but also you can say to this mountain, ‘Go, throw yourself into the sea,’ and it will be done.
Wupwo Lubaŋa Won i kare ducu pi jami ducu i nyiŋ Rwotwa Yecu Kricito. 	Therefore do not be foolish, but understand what the Lord’s will is.
Yecu dok openyogi ni, “Piŋo kono Cwiny Maleŋ dok omiyo Daudi olwoŋe ni Rwot? Pien yam oloko ni, 	“What do you think about the Messiah? Whose son is he?” “The son of David,” they replied.
ngeyo pwonynyo dano i tic me pa 	he knows how to train people in carpentry
lok adaa en aye ber	telling the truth is always good
mitto uci makwar me kwoyo bongo makwar 	wants red thread for sewing red clothes
odwoggo orwone  	he came the following day
cwiiyo remo ki lacwii 	sucking blood with a sucker 
onyette opye i loka gudu tung caa 	he leaped over the other skie of the road  
dano acel acel myerro ongee mada lok me legga 	everyone must know very much about praying
Lapwonnye man onoŋo ŋeyo ajwaka madit, omiyo en odonyo i dyekal pa ajwaka madit kacel ki Yecu	Simon Peter and another disciple were following Jesus
ogoye nono 	he beat him for no reason 
lacwec cammo ki opado  	a potter eats from broken pieces of the pottery
lunynyo bongone awene 	when does he undress?
agerro latin ot aduc meerra gang	I have built my small but at home
pali macego becco mada ki litino 	short pairs of trousers are very good for the children
pe iwekki, dong itye cok ka noggone 	do not give up, you are about to find it
Gigure i kom yatariya kunnu, ki jo mukene aryo kacel kwede, acel tuŋcel, acel tuŋcel, kun Yecu tye i dyere. 	Therefore the one who handed me over to you is guilty of a greater sin.”
lwak Iwangi gupong mada i wii oyoo ma otoo otop 	many flies are over crowded over the dead rotten rat 
Ento dano ma nene ogamo ciliŋ alip acel-li ocito okwinyo bur i ŋom, ci okano lim pa laditte woko iye. 	But the man who had received one bag went off, dug a hole in the ground and hid his master’s money.
pany cinge dit mada 	his palm is very big
dano ma olarre 	a person who is saved 
Pien jo mapol gibibino i nyiŋa, ma giwacci, ‘An aye a Kricito ma Lubaŋa oyero’, ci gibimiyo jo mapol rwenyo woko. 	For many will come in my name, claiming, ‘I am the Messiah,’ and will deceive many.
butto i ongoo yat .	sleeps in tree holes
dul dano ma gitiyo nyo gitukko kacel macallo me tukko odilo, nyo tiyo gin mo ma giribbe iye kacel 	a team is a group of people who work or play tongether as in football and other things
nyaarro wic ki magac 	to cut the hair with scissors
nyim nyo kat gionynyo i aduku ka dong gitinggo kwedde	simsim or millet are poured into the baskets and then they are carried with
“Wun jo Icrael, wuwiny lok man: Yecu Lanajaret obedo dano ma Lubaŋa aye onyuto botwu kun moko ki tic madito me twero, ki taŋo ki lanyut mapol ma Lubaŋa otiyo kacel kwede i kinwu, macalo wun wuŋeyo. 	“Fellow Israelites, listen to this: Jesus of Nazareth was a man accredited by God to you by miracles, wonders and signs, which God did among you through him, as you yourselves know.
Acoli gitye ki caro lok mapol mada 	the Acholi have many rich proverbs
kiyata twerro lak ummo poto woko 	the potato leaves can creep and cover the whole field
Cutcut Yecu ociko lupwonnyene ni gudony i yeya, gukwoŋ nyime me cito loka ca, kun noŋo en pud eciko lwak. 	The number of those who ate was about five thousand men, besides women and children.
iroco ka tiyo kit eno 	you were wrong or mistaken to do it that way 
cin dyang madongo twerro ryekke 	the cattle's large intestine can be cut open
oteerro gin ma okwallo kutyelo ci ocitto okanno woko wa i gwicce 	he took the things which he stole and went into the inner room and hid it in the inner place
oduro kok caa 	the alarm is being sounded there 
ocitto i Rome ci ogik iye pe dong omedde ki wotte 	he went to Rome and stopped there, he did not continue with his journey
en yam ŋat acel ma i kin jo apar wiye aryo-ni. En obino ki lwak ma gua bot ajwagi madito pa Lubaŋa ki lupwony-cik ki ludoŋo, ma gitye ki pala lucwan ki odoo-gu. 	With him was a crowd armed with swords and clubs, sent from the chief priests, the teachers of the law, and the elders.
Ento Lacuŋudwar, ma en Cwiny Maleŋ, ma Won bicwalo i nyiŋa, en bipwonyowu jami ducu, en bipoyo wiwu i lok ducu ma yam atittiwu. 	“All this I have spoken while still with you.
pele pa latin meno owekko gigoye	for her unruly behaviour and restlessness made her him to be beaten
pien en ŋeyo jo ducu, pe omito ni ŋat mo otit lok i kom dano mo bote, pien en kikome ŋeyo gin ma tye i cwiny dano.	But Jesus would not entrust himself to them, for he knew all people.
ka obinno Kampala ci tirro kwene? 	when he comes to Kampala where does he stay?
Itamo ni pe atwero lego Wora wek ocwalla lumalaika makato dul mony apar wiye aryo woko, i cawa man? 	Do you think I cannot call on my Father, and he will at once put at my disposal more than twelve legions of angels?
“Wuŋeyo ni odoŋ nino aryo ci doŋ bedo nino madit me Kato (Paska), ci Wod pa dano gibimiye woko me agura i kom yatariya.” 	“As you know, the Passover is two days away—and the Son of Man will be handed over to be crucified.”
Doŋ aleguwu me bedo ki winy bot jo-nu, ki jo mukene ducu ma giyelle kun gitiyo kacel kwedgi. 	to submit to such people and to everyone who joins in the work and labors at it.
pucgi me kom ot pe ber 	their plastering of the walls of the house is not good
ento litino me ker gibibologi woko i colpiny, ka ma dano bikok kun gikayo lakgi iye.” 	I say to you that many will come from the east and the west, and will take their places at the feast with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven.
oboyo gwana ma obullo abulla ki karatac 	he wrapped up cassava, which he grilled, with papers
Lwak ma yam onoŋo tye bote ka en lwoŋo Lajaro ki i lyel me cere ki i kin jo muto gutito pire. 	Only after Jesus was glorified did they realize that these things had been written about him and that these things had been done to him.
Doŋ acwalo utmegiwa botwu ennu wek nyattewa piwu i lok man pe ogik i lok keken, ento myero wubed ma wuyubbe i kit ma awaco botgi-ni. 	For I know your eagerness to help, and I have been boasting about it to the Macedonians, telling them that since last year you in Achaia were ready to give; and your enthusiasm has stirred most of them to action.
punno lawotti pe ber 	to con your friend is not good 
lacoone pe ngeyo lyeddo 	the fellow does not know how to shave 
en dok gammo twatwal 	he yawns too much
Lucan wutye kwedgi nino ducu, ento an pe abibedo kwedwu nino ducu.” 	He did not say this because he cared about the poor but because he was a thief; as keeper of the money bag, he used to help himself to what was put into it.
Pien pe tye gin mo ma gikano ma pe binen ka maleŋ, dok pe tye gin mo ma giumo ma pe gibiŋeyo, dok ma pe gibiyabo ka maleŋ. 	For there is nothing hidden that will not be disclosed, and nothing concealed that will not be known or brought out into the open.
keddo kom nyak maber ka pe odoko bur 	the tattoo marks or the beauty's scar marks develop well if it is not infected
dano ducu mabecco tam me nek pe binno i cwinygi 	all people of good will have no thought of killings
En mumiyo ka dano mo ocamo mugati man, nyo omato kikopo man ma kun kite pe myero, noŋo en odoko labal pi pyedo kom ki remo pa Rwot. 	So then, whoever eats the bread or drinks the cup of the Lord in an unworthy manner will be guilty of sinning against the body and blood of the Lord.
gin gucitto i Kampala i dwee me Mac 	they went to Kampala in the month of March 
guur wiigi i ot wek pe gukat woko 	surround the house to prevent them from coming out 
Guwacce ni, “Watye kany ki mugati abic ki rec aryo.” 	You give them something to eat.”
aburo robbo dong dano 	severe cold in the head causes eruption and ulceration of lips
Ento ajwagi madito pa Lubaŋa ki ludoŋo gubito lwak ni myero gupeny pi Baraba, guwek ginek Yecu woko. 	While Pilate was sitting on the judge’s seat, his wife sent him this message: “Don’t have anything to do with that innocent man, for I have suffered a great deal today in a dream because of him.”
litino gimaarro lyerre mada  	the children love swinging very much
kel cupa ducu me coda kany  	bring all the soda bottles here
lak tong man ber mada mitto acomma i bolle	this spear blade is very good it needs to be placed on its shaft
gilorro wii gwok woko i ot ci obolle cam kii wang diricatherefore he threw the food to it through the window. 	the dog was shut in the house 
Pien dano gitye ka waco ni waragana pek dok gwa, ento ka ao botwu koma nen goro, dok bene gin mo pe i lokka ma aloko botwu. 	I do not want to seem to be trying to frighten you with my letters.
meno agaa gi 	who are those? 
Wumedde ki mar i kinwu kekenwu macalo omego. 	Keep on loving one another as brothers and sisters.
pien an anyuttiwu lanen, wek wun bene wutim gin ma an atimo i komwu. 	“Then, Lord,” Simon Peter replied, “not just my feet but my hands and my head as well!”
yakko dano pe gin maber	to rob people is not a good thing
wii pamba wek odok tol  	twist or spin the cotton into threads
giwok ki tung kwene me citto i gangge? 	which way does one pass to go to his home?
dano gupwodde tin mada 	the people beat each other very much today
Ŋat ma ye lokke, nyuto tamme ni, Lubaŋa en me ada. 	He testifies to what he has seen and heard, but no one accepts his testimony.
gwar yugi man iteer iciwaq woko 	collect all the rubbish and go and burn it 
Nia i lonyone mapol wan ducu gimiyowa kica i kom kica. 	We have seen his glory, the glory of the one and only Son, who came from the Father, full of grace and truth.
Lubaŋa tye ka gwokowu ki tekke pi niyewu, wek wuno? larre ma giyubo, ma binen i kare me agikki piny. 	Praise be to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ! In his great mercy he has given us new birth into a living hope through the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead,
Ento ka Lujudaya ma i Tecalonika guwinyo ni Paulo ki Cira gitye ka tuco lok pa Lubaŋa i Berea bene, gin bene gubino kunnu, gurubo dano dok gutugo lwak. 	But when the Jews in Thessalonica learned that Paul was preaching the word of God at Berea, some of them went there too, agitating the crowds and stirring them up.
pe angeyo gin angoo ma omiyo tye ka judo	I do not know why he is sulky 
Guwacce ni, “Rwot, nen, pala lucwan tye kany aryo.” En odok iye botgi ni, “Meno romo.” 	The disciples said, “See, Lord, here are two swords.” “That’s enough!” he replied.
Ci odaŋŋe ki dwan maloŋo ni, “Ilaro aŋo kweda, Yecu Wod pa Lubaŋa Mamalo Twal? Alami ki nyiŋ Lubaŋa, pe iyela.” 	He shouted at the top of his voice, “What do you want with me, Jesus, Son of the Most High God? In God’s name don’t torture me!”
Pien Luba?a yam pe omiyowa cwiny me lworo, ento omiyowa cwiny me teko ki me mar ki me gwokke kenwa. 	I am reminded of your sincere faith, which first lived in your grandmother Lois and in your mother Eunice and, I am persuaded, now lives in you also.
olorro dong kabad me gicco li puk 	closed the door of the refrigerator tightly 
Man ma awaco-ni obedo carolok: Mon aryo magi nyuto gicikke aryo bene. Ŋat acel oa ki i wi got Cinai, litino ma en onywalo gubedo opii	His son by the slave woman was born according to the flesh, but his son by the free woman was born as the result of a divine promise.
latoo otimmo rat pi cudde woko 	the dying person did a wrong thing by killing himself
macalo gicoyo i buk me lok pa lanebi Icaya ni, “Dwan dano mo ma daŋŋe i tim ni, Wuger yo pa Rwot, wutir yone ocuŋ atir. 	As it is written in the book of the words of Isaiah the prophet: “A voice of one calling in the wilderness, ‘Prepare the way for the Lord, make straight paths for him.
Ci ociko ni gadigadi myero ocuŋ	And he gave orders to stop the chariot
Pe atye ki twero me tero dako ma Lakricitayo kacel kweda i wotta, macalo lukwena mukene, ki omego pa Rwot, ki Kepa? 	Don’t we have the right to take a believing wife along with us, as do the other apostles and the Lord’s brothers and Cephas?
lak palaa man twerro pakke maber mada 	the edge of this knife can be sharpened very well
Ento ka wutye ki nyeko marac i cwinywu, ki laro dito, pe wuwakke, pe bene wuwac lok goba i kom lok ada. 	But if you harbor bitter envy and selfish ambition in your hearts, do not boast about it or deny the truth.
Lwak dano bene gua ki i gaŋ murumo Jerucalem, gucokke kun gikelo lutwo ki jo ma cen marac yelogi, ci gin ducu gucaŋ. 	Crowds gathered also from the towns around Jerusalem, bringing their sick and those tormented by impure spirits, and all of them were healed.
nyig yaddi ma gitiyo kwede nino ducu en aye mucuggwa ki lemun, nyig yaddi mukene bene gitiyo kwedde 	the commonest fruits used are those of oranges and lemons but other fruits are also used
wotto ni nanga nanga ki agulu pii ma Mingo i wiye callo wot pa kinanga 	she walks swinging to and fro with water pot on the head walking like a giraffe
dano gubino ci gujimme woko i bar odilo 	people came and assembled or collected themselves in large numbers in the football field
ka imitto nekko twon jubu madit ci cit i ajwiya lee	if you want to kill a very big buffalo, go to the place where they drink water
Wumedde matek i lega, ma pe wunino, ento wumiyo pwoc bene. 	Masters, provide your slaves with what is right and fair, because you know that you also have a Master in heaven.
won tic man lakica mada pe oryammo jo ma ononggo gujemmo, otimmogi kica 	the owner of this work is a very kind man he did not dismiss those who went on strike, he forgave them 
nyim myerro gimoyo ka wekko pe top i dero 	simsim should be dried in the sun to prevent it from rotting
Pien jo ma loko lok kit meno ginyuto ka maleŋ ni gitye ka yenyo lobo tugi kikome. 	People who say such things show that they are looking for a country of their own.
geya en ngat acel i kom bel ento donggo mabor ma katto dano ka dong nyak ki iwiye kunu 	sorghum is one of the corn which grows very tall and some times taller than man and then produces the seeds there 
litino aye layo dyewor	the children are the ones that pass urine at night their beds 
timme kitmeno jwi jwi 	he behaves like that always
Pi niye Abraim, ka yam giteme, otyero Icaka macalo gitum bot Lubaŋa	By faith Abraham, when God tested him, offered Isaac as a sacrifice
lutic me gudo 	the road maintenance workers 
ginynyo boo madyak ki ma otwoo 	rubbing fresh cowpeas leaves (and folding them into small balls) and dried leaves to break them into small pieces 
Ento i ŋe nino adek ki nucu, yweyo me kwo oa ki bot Lubaŋa ci odonyo i komgi, ka doŋ gucako a malo, gucuŋo ki tyengi, mumiyo lworo madit twatwal omako jo ducu ma onenogi. 	But after the three and a half days the breath of life from God entered them, and they stood on their feet, and terror struck those who saw them.
get woko i doggola wek pe gukatti 	stand in the door way so that they may not pass 
kongo dong ocek pien dong tye ka jibbo 	the beer is now ready because it is simmering 
twerro citto 	he can go
olutto bolo i pii ni jum . 	he dipped the clothes altogether in the water
Oporre bota me paro piwu ducu kit meno, pien piwu litta twatwal, pien wun ducu wuribbe kacel kweda i nywako kica ma Lubaŋa omiya kanyi buc, ki dok i kare ma alaro pi lok me kwena maber wek omok matek. 	being confident of this, that he who began a good work in you will carry it on to completion until the day of Christ Jesus.
Gua i cawa-nu, gudok i Jerucalem	They asked each other, “Were not our hearts burning within us while he talked with us on the road and opened the Scriptures to us?”
mono me beddo latel wii dano, unfit 	unworthy or incapable of being a leader of the people 
tem wiye ki dul  	support his head with a cushion
roddo agulu	piling up pots on top of one another
lok me wollo pe myerro dok owinynye i gang kany 	there must not be another case of poisoning again in this home 
god ii ka wek itwee palini maber 	contract your abdominal muscles in order that you may tie your trousers  
Yecu dok owaco ki gin ni, “Kuc obed botwu. Macalo Won ceŋ oora, an bene aorowu.” 	On the evening of that first day of the week, when the disciples were together, with the doors locked for fear of the Jewish leaders, Jesus came and stood among them and said, “Peace be with you!”
Dok walego Rwot omiwu wumedde matek twatwal i mar, kun ŋat acel acel maro lawote ki jo ducu, i kit ma wan wamarowu kwede, 	May the Lord make your love increase and overflow for each other and for everyone else, just as ours does for you.
Myero pe obed dano ma pud olokke aloka nyen, miyo kette malo ki wakke, ci cut poto woko, lok loye macalo yam oloyo Catan. 	(If anyone does not know how to manage his own family, how can he take care of God’s church?)
En mumiyo myero wuwiny luloc, pe pi lworo kiniga pa Lubaŋa keken, ento me miyo wek wubed bene ma iwu leŋ. 	Do you want to be free from fear of the one in authority? Then do what is right and you will be commended.
Ka doŋ biamwonyi twago pii matek, ci orwone lutic mel gucako kwanyo jami ma i mel gubolo woko i pii. 	We took such a violent battering from the storm that the next day they began to throw the cargo overboard.
otigu pwot 	okra or lady fingers is viscous and slimy
teer dyel icitwee i kom locce ii anok.i ot 	take the goat and tie it on its peg on the raised floor in the house 
owotto mot ni cep cep mape ngatti mo owinynyo ci odonynyo i ot 	he walked softly without anybody hearing it and entered the house 
Wun bene kit meno, ki woko wunen bot dano ni wun jo ma kitwu atir, ento iwu noŋo opoŋ ki gin maraco keken. 	“Woe to you, teachers of the law and Pharisees, you hypocrites! You are like whitewashed tombs, which look beautiful on the outside but on the inside are full of the bones of the dead and everything unclean.
litino cukul tin gubakke mada ki tutuno kiyata meegi 	the students today made a lot of heaps of soil for the planting of their sweet potatoes
Ento kombeddi doŋ gigonyowa woko i kom cik, doŋ wato ki tuŋ bot gin ma con omakowa. Omiyo wan doŋ watye ka tic i yo manyen me Cwiny, pe dok i yo macon ca me lubo cik ma yam gicoyo acoya. 	For when we were in the realm of the flesh, the sinful passions aroused by the law were at work in us, so that we bore fruit for death.
Abedo ka tittiwu lok man tyen mapol ata, dok bene tin anwoyo tito botwu ki pig waŋa ni, tye jo mapol ma kwogi omiyo gibedo lukwor me to pa Yecu i kom yatariya. 	Only let us live up to what we have already attained.
lawinya mit mada me acamma ki kwon malyet 	the mixtures are very nice when eaten with hot millet bread
bin wek akwilli gin ma otimme laworo 	come and let me tell you in secret what happened yesterday 
myero wuŋe ni, ka ŋat ma okwanyo labalo ki i yone mugom odwoke cen, ŋat meno bilaro kwone woko ki i to, dok biumo balle mapol.	remember this: Whoever turns a sinner from the error of their way will save them from death and cover over a multitude of sins.
pe twerro nywarra kitmeno pien an aye ma anywalle 	she cannot give me such trouble because I am the one who gave birth to him  
oyo kayi kuti	a rat bites and soothes you at the same time
‘Lacen abionyo Cwiny mera Maleŋ i kom jo ducu	“‘In the last days, God says, I will pour out my Spirit on all people
ento dako ma lego Lubaŋa nyo ma tito lok pa Lubaŋa, ma kun pe oboyo wiye noŋo oketo lewic i wiye, pien pe tye apokapoka mo i kin en ki dako ma olyelo wiye woko. 	But every woman who prays or prophesies with her head uncovered dishonors her head—it is the same as having her head shaved.
pe ya ocitto 	not yet gone 
palaa ne wotte ki i akura ne  	the knife can be pulled out from its sheath
Cel me gaŋ bene onoŋo tye ki te gutine apar wiye aryo, ci i komgi onoŋo tye iye nyiŋ lukwena apar wiye aryo pa Latin romo. 	The wall of the city had twelve foundations, and on them were the names of the twelve apostles of the Lamb.
lokke lik pe myero me awaca 	the word is disgusting and shameful, it should not be mentioned anywhere 
dano tye ka werro wer lyel 	people are singing funeral songs 
Macalo yam otimme i kare pa Nua, bitimme kit meno bene i kare pa Wod pa dano. 	“Just as it was in the days of Noah, so also will it be in the days of the Son of Man.
iye onat 	his abdomen is flat 
Ka doŋ gutyeko cobo lok ma yam gicoyo i kome ducu, ci gukwanye woko ki i kom yat, gupyelo kome i lyel. 	When they had carried out all that was written about him, they took him down from the cross and laid him in a tomb.
Jo ma gucamo cam meno onoŋo giromo co alip aŋwen, ma pe gikwano iye mon ki litino. 	Afterward the disciples picked up seven basketfuls of broken pieces that were left over.
dano adii ma dong gicoyo? 	how many people have now been recruited?
Ento won ot odok iye owacci, ‘Pe, ka wudoyo doo magi woko, miyo wuputo kal woko bene kacel ki doo. 	“‘No,’ he answered, ‘because while you are pulling the weeds, you may uproot the wheat with them.
adita ne gicweyo maber mada	the small basket is very finely weaved
kwidi cwaa mako litino mapol 	many children are infected with thread worms 
Ber doŋ wugokke, wek gin ma yam lunebi guloko pire-ni pe opot i komwu. Guwacci, 	Take care that what the prophets have said does not happen to you:
dok pi jo ma timo tim kwele, jo ma buto ki co luwotgi, jo ma kwalo dano girwenyo kwede woko ali, lugoba, jo ma kwoŋo kwoŋ laboŋo tere, ki gin mukene ducu ma pe rwatte ki pwony me ada. 	We also know that the law is made not for the righteous but for lawbreakers and rebels, the ungodly and sinful, the unholy and irreligious, for those who kill their fathers or mothers, for murderers,
Pien ka wumaro jo ma marowu keken, ci wubinoŋo iye kit pwoc aŋo? Lujog-mucoro kono pe gitimo kit meno? 	If you love those who love you, what reward will you get? Are not even the tax collectors doing that?
Wuŋeyo ni, wan yam pe waboko lok mabeco nono, pe wakano tamwa pi noŋo lim, Lubaŋa aye cadenwa. 	You know we never used flattery, nor did we put on a mask to cover up greed—God is our witness.
wek wupwo gin maber makato. Man bimiyo wubedo ma cwinywu leŋ laboŋo bal mo i nino pa Kricito, 	And this is my prayer: that your love may abound more and more in knowledge and depth of insight,
coo adii ma gubinno tin ka tic 	how many men came to work today? 
Pien kit macalo Yona yam odoko lanyut bot jo Nineve, kit meno Wod pa dano bene bidoko lanyut bot yalwak me kare man. 	For as Jonah was a sign to the Ninevites, so also will the Son of Man be to this generation.
Gipwodowa, gitweyowa i buc, dano giroko lwak me lweny i komwa, watiyo tic matek, ma nino ki cam bene oremowa. 	Rather, as servants of God we commend ourselves in every way: in great endurance; in troubles, hardships and distresses;
Lamalaika pa Rwot onen bote kun ocuŋ yo tuŋ lacuc i ŋet keno tyer me waŋo odok eceta. 	Then an angel of the Lord appeared to him, standing at the right side of the altar of incense.
ocitto ka nenno meeye 	he went to see his secret woman friend
gutungge ka lweny nono 	they started fighting for nothing 
Apwoyo Lubaŋa kare ducu ka alwoŋo nyiŋi i legana, 	Grace and peace to you from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
en binyono bur me biyo koŋo vino me akemo pa Lubaŋa mager ma en Won Twer Ducu-ni. 	“He will rule them with an iron scepter.” He treads the winepress of the fury of the wrath of God Almighty.
Yecu owoto orumo lobo Galilaya ducu, kun pwonyo i kacokkegi, dok bene onoŋo tito lok me kwena maber me ker pa Lubaŋa, ocaŋo bene kit two ducu ki kit goro ducu ki i kin dano. 	Jesus went throughout Galilee, teaching in their synagogues, proclaiming the good news of the kingdom, and healing every disease and sickness among the people.
Pien carolok man tye kakare ni, ‘Lacoyo pat, lakayo pat.’ 	Even now the one who reaps draws a wage and harvests a crop for eternal life, so that the sower and the reaper may be glad together.
ocubbo lee ci tong okatto ni pil 	he speared the animal and the spear passed through the body
acitto ka nenno jogana pien awinynyyo ni pe tye maber 	I went to see my friend because I heard that she was not well
dano onongo ocullo doggola ento en obinno oride odonynyo 	the door was blocked by people but he came and pushed himself through with force into the house
coo gitinggo jami wii pal gwok, mon gitinggo ki wic	men carry things on the shoulders, while women carry on the heads
obeddo ka wirro lakodi moo moni ci obokko komme woko 	he has been smearing with a certain oil on his body and has turned her body brown  
ryam gweno pe obek pal ma gipito ni 	drive away the chicken from pecking the groundnuts which have just been planted
en tye ka joggo dano pi gallene mape binno kwedde oyot oyot 	his delay to come quickly, is delaying the people
“An Kalaudio Licia amoto in Laloyo Maber Pelici. 	Claudius Lysias, To His Excellency, Governor Felix: Greetings.
twoo dong oluurro ladit woko 	the oldman is now worn out with the repeated attacks of illness
Wan pe watito lok i komwa kenwa, ento i kom Yecu Kricito, ma en aye obedo Rwot, ma wan kikomwa wadoko luticwu pi Yecu. 	The god of this age has blinded the minds of unbelievers, so that they cannot see the light of the gospel that displays the glory of Christ, who is the image of God.
owanno tyenne 	he has hurt his foot
Man aye gin mumiyo wapwoyo Lubaŋa kare ki kare, pien cakke ma wugamo lok pa Lubaŋa ma wuwinyo ki botwa, pe wugamo macalo lok pa dano, ento macalo lok pa Lubaŋa. Ada aye lok pa Lubaŋa tye bene ka tic i iwu wun jo muye Yecu. 	And we also thank God continually because, when you received the word of God, which you heard from us, you accepted it not as a human word, but as it actually is, the word of God, which is indeed at work in you who believe.
danone pe nen atata ikin dano	the man does not appear frequently among the people
tula cammo dye wor, wangge (Immo mada nyo otulle, en aye omiyo gilwongo ni tula tula cammo jami ma tino tino ma lak macallo lagwee ki oyoogi mukene 	owl eats at night, has very large eyes and eats crawling creatures such as lizards, rats, and so on
latinne kitte rac pien laworo odaa mada ki wonne 	the child has very bad habit because yesterday, he quarrelled very much with his father
oyeyo pekko mo madit mada i wiye 	he is involved in big trouble or a big case
caden ma gikellogi ducu, gin lugoba keken 	all the witnesses brought, Were liers only
“Pe wulwor, wun jo Cion. Nen, kabakawu bino botwu, obedo i wi latin kana!” 	Jesus found a young donkey and sat on it, as it is written:
mee pa agaa? 	belonging to whom? 
Lok meno oywek owinnye oromo lobo meno ducu. 	After the crowd had been put outside, he went in and took the girl by the hand, and she got up.
Pi meno, jo ma gineno can i yo ma Lubaŋa mito, ber gumine kengi i ciŋ Lacwec ma genne, kun gitiyo gin ma atir.	And, “If it is hard for the righteous to be saved, what will become of the ungodly and the sinner?”
“En latin ma ginywalo me bedo kabaka pa Lujudaya-ni tye kwene? Pien onoŋo waneno lakalatwene yo tuŋ wokceŋ, ci man wabino ka wore.” 	and asked, “Where is the one who has been born king of the Jews? We saw his star when it rose and have come to worship him.”
Pii bene aye ma yam otyeko lobo me kare maca ka pii aluka ocorre omwonyo woko. 	By these waters also the world of that time was deluged and destroyed.
Pien man aye dano ma yam lanebi Icaya otito pire ni, “Dwan dano mo ma daŋŋe i tim ni, Wuger yo pa Rwot, wutir yone ocuŋ atir.” 	and saying, “Repent, for the kingdom of heaven has come near.”
Apokapoka mo doŋ pe i kin Lajudaya ki dano me Grik, i kin opii ki ŋat ma lone kene, kadi i kin laco ki dako, pien wun ducu doŋ wurom i Kricito Yecu. 	for all of you who were baptized into Christ have clothed yourselves with Christ.
lokke geerro ic 	the matter is annoying
dok gubed mon ma loyo tamgi kengi, mon maleŋ ma pe gitye ki tam mo me caro caro, ma gigwoko pacogi, mon ma lukica kun giworo coggi bene, wek pe omi jo mukene guyet lok pa Lubaŋa. 	Then they can urge the younger women to love their husbands and children,
cwal jami ducu ma i ot woko wek giwir kom ot 	take all the things from the house outside so that the walls of the house may be white washed
Waciko kodi dano macalo meno, dok wabako dogwa botgi i Rwot Yecu Kricito ni, myero guti ticgi mot, wek ŋat acel acel opitte gire kene. 	Such people we command and urge in the Lord Jesus Christ to settle down and earn the food they eat.
Ento Yecu oŋeyo raccwiny ma gitye kwede, ci owaco botgi ni, “Wun wubwola piŋo, wun lugoba? 	Tell us then, what is your opinion? Is it right to pay the imperial tax to Caesar or not?”
ento ŋat acel acel i kingi gimiye mucara me nino acel. 	But each one of them also received a denarius.
nyimme tweerro twomme ki i dero 	the simsim can be taken from the barn
twoo aona opiyo nobbo kom dano woke 	pulmonary tuberculosis weakened the body
cit icikel tong kany 	go and bring his spear
cit icilwok bogoni pien dong onioggo twatwal 	go and wash your clothes because they are very dirty 
twol otonggo opuny tyenne 	he has been bitten on the heel by a snake 
cukke dit mada ma ka kionynyo iye inonggo jami opwodde ata ma kitgi pat pat 	the market is very big, when you enter it, you find plenty of things of different types everywhere
Nen, doŋ acok bino.” Tye ki gum dano ma lubo lok ma gitito i buk man. 	“Look, I am coming soon! Blessed is the one who keeps the words of the prophecy written in this scroll.”
gii wiye maber ka tye iye nyugi 	examine the head carefully to find out if there are lice in the hair
latin ma oteg myerro giwekko butte kec ci dwokke woko i tyeng 	a child who is stubborn and disobedient should be left to sleep without eating anything, that will bring him into line
Lubaŋa ma olwoŋowu me ribbe kacel ki Wode Yecu Kricito Rwotwa, en ŋat ma genne. 	God is faithful, who has called you into fellowship with his Son, Jesus Christ our Lord.
ngeyo kutto lure mada	knows how to play the recorder very well
leb tunga labolo iteer i ot 	carry the bunch of the plantain into the house 
Atito botwu ni, i nino meno can pa Codom bibedo twaratwara makato pa gaŋ meno. 	I tell you, it will be more bearable on that day for Sodom than for that town.
gucom i kom kwac ki i woor me nino adek ma okatto 	they met unexpectedly with a leopard at night three days ago
rangi ma giwirro i kom doggola twerro gobbe woko 	colour painted on the door can be scraped, 
Yecu openyo lupwonnyene ni, “I kare ma yam aorowu laboŋo kicaa lim, nyo opiro, kadi war, gin mo oremowu?” Gugamo ni, “Pe.” 	Then Jesus asked them, “When I sent you without purse, bag or sandals, did you lack anything?” “Nothing,” they answered.
komme nyongge woko oyot oyot ka otiyo tic mo manok 	his body weakens easily after a short walk 
Gutimo kumeno, gumiyo dano ducu gubedo piny. 	The disciples did so, and everyone sat down.
gee iiarro makko gweni 	the alligator is fond of catching chicken 
pot i pii wek ikwang 	dive into water so as to swim
Ento ŋat ma ribbe ki Rwot, doko cwiny acel kwede. 	But whoever is united with the Lord is one with him in spirit.
joo ma yee lok pa Lubaga 	those who believe in God's word
Ka Kricito yam pe gicero, ci kony me niyewu bene pe, noŋo pud wutye i balwu. 	And if Christ has not been raised, your faith is futile; you are still in your sins.
latinne pe ngeyo loggo cingge ki wangge 	his child does not know how to wash his hands face 
ywiin tee odoone woko 	make the bottom of the stick small
panggo odilo 	dodging the ball
bongone jug oyot oyot 	the clothes shrivel or shrink very easily 
Doŋ wamito ŋat acel acel i kinwu oket cwinye nio wa agikki, wek omi gin ma wuketo iye genwu-ni ocobbe kakare. 	We want each of you to show this same diligence to the very end, so that what you hope for may be fully realized.
Paulo opido ni, “Peya abalo lok mo i kom cik pa Lujudaya kadi ot pa Lubaŋa, kadi wa bot laloc madit Cecar.” 	Then Paul made his defense: “I have done nothing wrong against the Jewish law or against the temple or against Caesar.”
Abraim owacce ni, ‘Ka pe giwinyo lok pa Moses ki lunebi, ci kadi bed ŋat mo oa ki i kin jo muto bene, pe gibiye lokke.’ ”	“He answered, ‘Then I beg you, father, send Lazarus to my family,
acikati monni owekko okulat kany i tee kongo 	a certain policeman has left his handbag at the dinking place okuma n black water tortoise, much bigger than the ones seen on land 
en latam mada pe tiyo gin mo mape kong otammo matek pirre 	he is a great thinker, he does not do anything before he thinks hard about it 
litino pe gimaarro dek ajoga	children do not like sauce without simsim in it
omiine cabun 	he gave her a piece of soap 
piny oruu 	it is dawn 
Dok odok ka lego Lubaŋa tyen me aryo kun lego ni, “Wora, ka kikopo man pe twero kato ma pe amato, wek gin ma imito otimme.” 	He went away a second time and prayed, “My Father, if it is not possible for this cup to be taken away unless I drink it, may your will be done.”
Lupwonnye guwacce ni, “Ka ce lok i kom laco ki dakone tye kit meno, ci doŋ pe myero dano gunyomme do.” 	The disciples said to him, “If this is the situation between a husband and wife, it is better not to marry.”
Gipwoyowu ki ŋo, ka wudiyo cwinwyu ma noŋo gipwodowu pi bal? Ento ka ce wudiyo cwinywu ma noŋo wutye ka neno can pi timo gin maber, meno aye Lubaŋa pwoyo. 	For it is commendable if someone bears up under the pain of unjust suffering because they are conscious of God.
roc ticce woko 	spoil his work 
Wun wucadenwa, ki Lubaŋa bene ŋeyo kit ma wabedo kwede maleŋ dok ma kitwa atir, laboŋo lok mo ma oloyowa i nyimwu wun jo muye Yecu. 	You are witnesses, and so is God, of how holy, righteous and blameless we were among you who believed.
aruk dyang ber me acella pien tye moo madowong mada 	hump of the cattle is very nice for frying or roasting because it has much fat in it
Ento i kom jo Icrael owaco ni, “Yam abedo ka ryeyo ciŋa dyeceŋ jwi bot jo ma pe giwinyo doga, jo ma ŋipyem kweda.”	And Isaiah boldly says, “I was found by those who did not seek me; I revealed myself to those who did not ask for me.”
Wuwiny ba, an Paulo kombeddi awacciwu ni, ka gilirowu, ci kony pa Kricito doŋ pe botwu. 	Stand firm, then, and do not let yourselves be burdened again by a yoke of slavery.
Yecu oa olubo kore kacel ki lupwonnyene. 	“No one sews a patch of unshrunk cloth on an old garment, for the patch will pull away from the garment, making the tear worse.
Danonu ocito, otito bot Lujudaya ni, “Yecu aye ocaŋa.” 	The man who was healed had no idea who it was, for Jesus had slipped away into the crowd that was there.
lemme twerro bappe ka beddo ka yello luwotgi 	his cheek can be slapped if he keeps on troubling his companions 
dano ducu ka gibutto myerro gubut i lak nget	all people, when they are sleeping, they should sleep on the flanks 
dano ka poo twatwal i kom mwoc mo manok, nonggo tye ki maleriya 	if a man startles quite often due to small noises, usually he has malaria
Dako okwaye ni, “Ladit, miya pii meno, wek orwo pe dok oneka, awek bino wa kany ka twomo pii.” 	Are you greater than our father Jacob, who gave us the well and drank from it himself, as did also his sons and his livestock?”
goyo oduro bot rwot 	accusing a person to the chief or bringing an action against a person before the chief
teer Lodi mac wek oket i pac me goyo bongone	take the embers charcoal so that he may put into the iron box for ironing clothes
I kare meno en biculo kwor i kom jo ma pe ŋeyo Lubaŋa, ki i kom jo ma pe gilubo lok me kwena maber i kom Rwotwa Yecu. 	He will punish those who do not know God and do not obey the gospel of our Lord Jesus.
ka en oo botwu myero wujole maber, 	My fellow prisoner Aristarchus sends you his greetings, as does Mark, the cousin of Barnabas
en tammoni en kene aye ma eryek pien cayo dano mukene mada 	frying meat
Konyo dano ma olimo lobo ducu ki gin aŋo mono, ka ce kwone gikwanyo woko? 	What good is it for someone to gain the whole world, yet forfeit their soul?
yatte jangge dwog twatwal, myerro gitong moggo woko 	the tree has too many branches, some should be cut down
ngab bolo kom yat eno 	hang or suspend the cloth from the tree
Waraga man oa ki bot Cimon Petero, latic dok lakwena pa Yecu Kricito. Bot wun jo ma wunoŋo niye ma pire tek ma rom ki mewa pi kit ma atir pa Lubaŋawa ma en Lalarwa Yecu Kricito: 	Simon Peter, a servant and apostle of Jesus Christ, To those who through the righteousness of our God and Savior Jesus Christ have received a faith as precious as ours:
teer jami maggi i ot 	take all these things into the house 
lakwoo opotto i kulu ci orweny woko, lacen dong opille wa loka tung caa 	the thief fell into the water and disappeared, later he emerged on the other side of the river
tung lee wek gubin ci wacubgi 	stir the animals so that they may come to us to spear them
lwakki kwkii gucorre ma giwotto ni gunynya gunynya 	so many catepillars came 
cok jami atata ducu matye i tee baraja kany wek iciwanggi woko  	collect all these useless things on the verandah here and go and burn
mon mukene ka gitye ki yacco gijony mada pien pe gicammo maber gibeddo ka ngok kare ki kare 	some women when they are pregnant, they become very thin because they don't eat very well, they continue vomiting from time to time
Cimon odokke iye ni, “Atamo ni en ma gitimo kica pi wel banya madwoŋ-ŋi.” Ogamo ni, “Iŋolo kakare.” 	Simon replied, “I suppose the one who had the bigger debt forgiven.” “You have judged correctly,” Jesus said.
Ka lacen doŋ gubedo piny kunnu ka kiye. 	When they had crucified him, they divided up his clothes by casting lots.
gikke i dong tic kany obeddo awene? 	when did his stoppage at work take place? 
pe omito cito i Judaya, pien Lujudaya gimito neke. 	After this, Jesus went around in Galilee
wotto ma tanynyo korre atanynya	pushing his chest forward, in a boastful manner while walking 
Ka oo otyeno, won poto olok owaco bot lakan jamine ni, ‘Lwoŋ lutic, ci icul mucaragi. Cak ki i kom jo ma gucako tic lacen, nio kwede wa i kom jo ma gukwoŋo bino.’ 	“When evening came, the owner of the vineyard said to his foreman, ‘Call the workers and pay them their wages, beginning with the last ones hired and going on to the first.’
wek remo pa jo ducu ma kitgi atir ma ginekogi i lobo obed i wiwu, cakke ki i kom remo pa Abel ma balle pe-ni nio kwede i kom remo pa Jekaria wod pa Barakia, ma yam wuneko i kin kabedo maleŋ ki keno tyer pa Lubaŋa. 	Some of them you will kill and crucify; others you will flog in your synagogues and pursue from town to town.
waecitto ka legga 	we are going for prayer 
dyangi gitye ka mol ni rubu rubu 	the cattle are passing by in great number
Latic i kal owacce ni, “Ladit, bin ma peya latinna oto.” 	“Unless you people see signs and wonders,” Jesus told him, “you will never believe.”
oneno, ci oye. 	Finally the other disciple, who had reached the tomb first, also went inside
pii takke ki i agulo ma gitwommo iye ci oo piny 	because of shaking, the water flows over the brim of the pot where it has been put
papai ne otop ci dong tye ka rutte woko 	the pawpaw is rotten and it is becoming completely rotten
Wukwer tim maraco ducu. 	reject every kind of evil.
Oyero jo apar wiye aryo wek gubed kacel kwede, dok wek eorgi gubed lukwena me tito lok, 	He appointed twelve that they might be with him and that he might send them out to preach
gigukke ma ononggo pwod mitto ngallo luduku agall 	he was surprised just as he was about to cork the gun
wek ŋat mo pe owac ni gibatija en i nyiŋa. 	so no one can say that you were baptized in my name.
Pien wan kikomwa yam koŋ wabedo lumiŋ, jo ma pe luwiny	to slander no one, to be peaceable and considerate, and always to be gentle toward everyone.
Ka kun giboko lok ma bene gilaro kacel, Yecu kikome onyiko cok, owoto kwedgi. 	They were talking with each other about everything that had happened.
ryam gwok woko ki i ot 	chase or drive away the dog from the house
pe onoŋo dok ye ni dano mo oŋol i ot pa Lubaŋa ki yec mo. 	and would not allow anyone to carry merchandise through the temple courts.
ento an pe abibedo kwedwu kare ducu. 	But you will not always have me.
awak poto gin maber mada pien konynyo kadi lacan 	community cultivation of fields is very good because it helps even a poor person
litino gukatto ki ngwec ni raka raka ka neno labwor ma gikello ma giguro wiye woko i wii lori 	the children ran from all directions to see a lion in a cage on a lorry
Dok aneno lamalaika mo matek twatwal ma onoŋo tye ka tito lok ki dwan maloŋo ni, “Aŋa ma myero me yabo buk adola-ni, ki me yabo ka ma gimwono kwede woko?” 	And I saw a mighty angel proclaiming in a loud voice, “Who is worthy to break the seals and open the scroll?”
pien Rwot culo kwor i lok magi ducu macalo wan yam watito botwu kun wacikowu bene matek. 	The Lord will punish all those who commit such sins, as we told you and warned you before.
Ento gin mo ducu wutim i kit maber, dok kore ki kore.	But everything should be done in a fitting and orderly way.
oye me cullo banya me lim ma emakko 	he agreed to pay the debt of the money that he borrowed
en larop dong dano mada miyo gilwenynyo 	he is a very provocative person who causes people to fight
wan Lujudaya ma wan aye jo mukwoŋo bedo ki gen i kom Kricito, myero wami dano gupak deyo pa Lubaŋa. 	In him we were also chosen, having been predestined according to the plan of him who works out everything in conformity with the purpose of his will,
ocakko tukke ki lweny labonggo teerre 	he started fighting without any reason 
mittoni gilwong nyiggi i kanica me ribbe 	he wants their names to be announced in church for the wedding 
pokko gin man pe tek 	dividing this thing is not difficult 
lacoone dok lalilii mada nino ducu ka tye i kin dano ci kello daa nyo lweny 	the man is a great trouble maker, every time he is present among the people, he often causes quarrels or fights 
olimmo atwom mada i kare ma gimakke 	he was tortured very much when he was arrested
dano ma kwero cam bene kwero pi Rwot, pwoyo Lubaŋa bene. 	Whoever regards one day as special does so to the Lord
mac twerro obbe kany 	the fire can be made here 
Pien coc ma yam gicoyo i ginacoya wacci, “Lewic pe bimako ŋat ma ye en.” 	For it is with your heart that you believe and are justified, and it is with your mouth that you profess your faith and are saved.
gudonnyo ma gumwolle 	they humbled themselves as they enter the room 
tep me wer kanica tye kwene, amitto ketto wek awiny? 	where is the tape for the church songs, I want to put it into music system so that I may listen to them? 
gimiyo kabuto ducu ma pat pat 	they were given separate rooms
Dano ma ocoyo kodi ki ŋat muonyo pii iye, gin ducu girom, ŋat acel acel binoŋo mucarane muporo tic ma en otiyo. 	The one who plants and the one who waters have one purpose, and they will each be rewarded according to their own labor.
ceng me Baraja en aye ceng pkio 	Monday is the day for court sessions 
man culla me banya me lim ma nenne amakko 	this is the payment for the money that I borrowed
gwok iyet gatti mo 	do not abuse anybody
gar tye kakatto caa 	the train is passing there
gerre atata en aye nyayo two jonyo 	promiscuous sexual intercourse is the one that is responsible for the spread of AIDS 
dano matkidi myerro pe beddo ki banya madit	a young man should not have a large debt of money
Ento ka ceŋ oryeny, owaŋogi gutwo woko, pien onoŋo lwitgi pe. 	But when the sun came up, the plants were scorched, and they withered because they had no root.
Yecu odok iye ki gin ni, “Pe wuŋur i kinwu kenwu. 	They said, “Is this not Jesus, the son of Joseph, whose father and mother we know? How can he now say, ‘I came down from heaven’?”
bor pa bongone twerro pimme 	the length of the cloth can be measured
lagweno kulu riggo madwir mada mape twerro makke ka ryammone aryamma keken 	where has the person who rakes here gone?
en doŋ pe tye ki twero mo matwal me loko jo ma bino bot Lubaŋa gudok jo mabeco muteggi. 	For this reason it can never, by the same sacrifices repeated endlessly year after year, make perfect those who draw near to worship.
okwerra ni myerro pe acitti 	he refused that I should go
otole tye i otwegge ma lacam 	there is a bursa on his left elbow
twonno kongo woko 	refused to give (him) beer 
Lubaŋa Wonwa ki Rwotwa Yecu Kricito omiwu kica kacel ki kuc, 	and all the brothers and sisters with me, To the churches in Galatia:
pii nyette ni rit rit 	the water spurts intermittently
Yecu ogamo doggi ni, “Kono Lubaŋa wonwu, kono wumara, pien an aa ki bot Lubaŋa, koni doŋ atye kany	“The only Father we have is God himself.”
dano tinggo teer ma pek ki gwokgi 	people carry heavy weight on their shoulder
Lamalaika ma oa ki i polo onen bote kun miye tek. 	An angel from heaven appeared to him and strengthened him.
Ka lukwat guneno gin ma otimme, ci guriŋo, gutero lokke i gaŋ madit ki i kin paco. 	When those tending the pigs saw what had happened, they ran off and reported this in the town and countryside,
Utmegiwa, wuleg Lubaŋa piwa. 	Brothers and sisters, pray for us.
Watye ki gen i Rwot i komwu ni, wutye ka tiyo gin ma nene wacikowu ni wuti, dok bene wubimedde ki tiyone. 	We have confidence in the Lord that you are doing and will continue to do the things we command.
Pien en onoŋo tye ka kuro gaŋ ca ma tye ki gutine ducu matek, ma Lubaŋa aye obedo ŋat mugoyo calle, ki lagedone kikome. 	For he was looking forward to the city with foundations, whose architect and builder is God.
Ŋat ma camo koma, ma mato remona, bedo i an, an bene abedo i iye. 	For my flesh is real food and my blood is real drink.
cwiny kikome mito loyo abita pa Catan, ento kom aye nyap.” 	The spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak.”
giwang ngo cuci me kado atwonna 	the chaff is burnt for alkaline salt
Lamalaika odokke iye ni, “Cwiny Maleŋ bibino i komi, tek pa En Mamalo Twal biumi macalo tipo	The angel answered, “The Holy Spirit will come on you, and the power of the Most High will overshadow you
nyo aŋa ma omiyoni twero man?” 	“Who gave you this authority?”
Ento en otiŋo balwa i kome kene i kom yatariya, wek wan wato i bal, ka doŋ wabed kwo i kit ma atir. Pi pwod ma gipwode kwede omiyo wucaŋ. 	Instead, he entrusted himself to him who judges justly.
ot pa lupoya opong ki eel keken 	the mad peoples' house is full of faeces 
in dano madit ot man dong pe myerro ki in 	you are an important person, this house is not now suitable for you
Pe tye larre mo i ŋat mukene, pien pe tye nyiŋ mo mukene i wi lobo man ma gimiyo ki wan dano ma myero walarre iye.” 	Salvation is found in no one else, for there is no other name under heaven given to mankind by which we must be saved.”
danone dong opac woko pe parro ngati mo	the man does not care about anybody, he is unruly
caarro lok 	speaking meaningless words 
Jo ma tito ki cwiny maber-ri gitito pi mar, kun giŋeyo ni Lubaŋa oketa kany ka lweny pi lok me kwena maber. 	It is true that some preach Christ out of envy and rivalry, but others out of goodwill.
tye rue ma nok 	there is a small quantity of rice 
mak kikopone maber koni bite woko ki cingi 	hold the cup carefully, it is likely to slip off from your hand
En yam omine kene piwa me kokowa woko ki i bal ducu, ki me lonyowa wabed jone kikome, ma watye ki miti madwoŋ me tiyo tic mabeco. 	while we wait for the blessed hope—the appearing of the glory of our great God and Savior, Jesus Christ,
kwon kal agwee mit mada	the kwon made from fresh millet is very nice and tasty
lalur arara en aye rac mada me makko lee 	the spotted hyena is the one that is very good at catching the animals
Gudokke iye ni, “Rwot wamito waŋwa oyabbe.” 	“Lord,” they answered, “we want our sight.”
anyogine dong cok ka teggi 	the maize is nearly fully developed, grown and mature
amiyo gira pira kena. Atye ki twer me miyo kwona, dok atye ki twer me gamo doki	No one takes it from me, but I lay it down of my own accord
Waa ki kunnu, wakwaŋ warabo ŋet Caiprac, pien yamo okemowa, 	From there we put out to sea again and passed to the lee of Cyprus because the winds were against us.
kare mogo cwinynye the ni myerro etina gin mo 	sometimes his mind is urged to do something 
Pien dano ma pe ki gin magi noŋo en latowaŋ, pe neno gin mo ki ka mabor, dok noŋo wiye doŋ owil woko ni yam gilwoke woko i kom balle macon. 	But whoever does not have them is nearsighted and blind, forgetting that they have been cleansed from their past sins.
I kare ma Yecu doŋ otyeko loko lok magi ducu, owaco bot lupwonnyene ni, 	When Jesus had finished saying all these things, he said to his disciples,
Pien yam onoŋo wuŋak wurwenyo woko calo romi, ento kombeddi doŋ wudwogo bot Lakwat ki Lagwok tipowu.	“He himself bore our sins” in his body on the cross, so that we might die to sins and live for righteousness; “by his wounds you have been healed.”
laminggi tye kany 	the stupid fellow is here
Waraga man oa ki bot Paulo ma en latic pa Yecu Kricito, ma Lubaŋa olwoŋo me bedo lakwena, ka doŋ gimiye tic me tito lok me kwena maber ma oa ki bot Lubaŋa. 	Rather, clothe yourselves with the Lord Jesus Christ, and do not think about how to gratify the desires of the flesh.
leggo odilo citto malo	to kick the ball very high
Dako mo onoŋo tye kunnu ma yam onoŋo twoyo two agobi pi mwaka apar wiye aryo, ma doŋ obalo limme ducu bot daktar, ento pe otwero caŋ. 	And a woman was there who had been subject to bleeding for twelve years, but no one could heal her.
pe ngeyo ketto moo maber i kom mukati ma gigolo, patto mere moone apatta 	he does not know how to spread butter on the side of breads, he simply smear thick butter on the bread 
otel en aye ot kama dano giwotto gicitto gibutto iye pi kare manok dok gicammo iye ci pi man ducu gicullo iye 	a hotel is a house into which people go and stay for sometime, they also eat there and for all these they pay 
jinynyo wang i kom dano ka gibinno ka nenni pe ber 	screwing up eyes at the people when they come to see you is not good 
juk nyim iteerre omwoddi 	collect the simsim with your hands and take it to him to eat
litinino gimaarro cammo arwaa pien obeddo gio gio 	children like to eat the meat remaining after the fat has melted from frying because it is crisp
Lok man lok me ada, myero dano ducu guye ni, Kricito Yecu yam obino i lobo pi laro lubalo. I kin lubalo an aye abedo labal mukwoŋo, 	The grace of our Lord was poured out on me abundantly, along with the faith and love that are in Christ Jesus.
Ento waŋeyo ni dano pe gikwano ni kite atir pien tiyo gin ma cik mito, kono pi ye Yecu Kricito keken. Kadi wa wan Lujudaya bene watyeko ye Yecu Kricito wek gikwanwa ni kitwa tir pi ye Kricito, ento pe pi tiyo gin ma cik mito	“We who are Jews by birth and not sinful Gentiles
Aŋeyo ni ka apokke woko kwedwu, orudi mager bidonyo i kinwu ci pe gibitimo kica bot romi. 	I know that after I leave, savage wolves will come in among you and will not spare the flock.
kace pe ibinno 	oh dear, even you, you do come for courtship
pe item nyeddo lok kany, cit inyed ki gangwu kuno 	don't try to speak arrogantly here, go and speak it at your home there 
pe maarro mwoc pa luduko pien miyo poo twatwal 	he does not like the burst of the guns because it startles him very much
gammo lok pe ber  	joining in a talk which one does not know is bad
latin man dok poo twatwal, myerro kome obed lit 	this child startles too much, he must be ill 
en dano ma laworro mada 	he is a very humble and obedient person 
an akwero bedo laŋolkop i lok macalo meno.” 	I will not be a judge of such things.”
ruk pa mon me nino man pe dong gibecco callo kit macon 	the present women's dresses are not as good as those of the past
jami mapol mada ma gitiyo i wii meja 	there are many things which are done on top of the table
nyom maleng en aye me ribbe i kanica 	holy marriage is the wedding in the church
medda nyim manok i kom macca wek awill  	add for me a little more simsim on that one there so that I may buy it
gutemmo jukko latinni ni pe oryam motoka marac 	they tried in vain to dissuade the child from driving the car dangerously
latin lakerre pe cirro koyo myerro komme beddo auma	a neonate does not stand the cold therefore his body must be covered all the time
Abako doga botwu utmegina, pi Rwotwa Yecu Kricito ki pi mar pa Cwiny Maleŋ, wuket tek wuribbe kacel i legawu pira bot Lubaŋa, 	I know that when I come to you, I will come in the full measure of the blessing of Christ.
kom rii obeddo abac abac	the zebra skin is stripped black and white
Wugwokke wek ŋat mo pe oŋakwu woko ki tam me ryeko nyo me bwola mo ma tere pe, kun wulubo kit pa kwaro ki pwony pa jogi macon me lobo, ma pe wulubo Kricito. 	rooted and built up in him, strengthened in the faith as you were taught, and overflowing with thankfulness.
tyerro ringo ki rwot 	presenting meat to the chief
Pien Jon Labatija doŋ obino kun pe camo kwon, pe mato koŋ vino bene wun wuwaco ni, ‘En tye ki cen marac.’ 	For John the Baptist came neither eating bread nor drinking wine, and you say, ‘He has a demon.’
dok gimaro bedo i kabedo me deyo i karama, ki bedo i kom me dito i kacokke. 	Then Jesus said to the crowds and to his disciples:
Ento laco mo ma nyiŋe Anania ki dakone Capira gucato jamigi, 	Now a man named Ananias, together with his wife Sapphira, also sold a piece of property.
tye ka ronynyo lawotte 	he is making fun of his friend
man aye kodi ma onoŋo gicoyo okir i ŋet yo. 	This is the seed sown along the path.
labwoto me yobbo mutoka	an expert in repairing the car
tallo dano pe ber 	casting spell on the people is not good 
I lwenywu ma wulwenyo ki bal pud peya wulwenyo wuo wa i oyo remowu. 	In your struggle against sin, you have not yet resisted to the point of shedding your blood.
doŋ ka ŋat mo mito timogi rac, meno aye kit ma gibineke kwede. 	This is how anyone who wants to harm them must die.
Ceŋ nyo dwe pe bimitte i gaŋ meno me ryeny iye, pien deyo pa Lubaŋa aye leŋo ma tye kunnu, ki tarane en aye Latin romo. 	The city does not need the sun or the moon to shine on it, for the glory of God gives it light, and the Lamb is its lamp.
leba omakke nyo en tye ki leba 	he has painful swelling of the groin glands
Kuc ki mar ki niye ma a bot Lubaŋa Won ki Rwotwa Yecu Kricito obed bot utmegiwa. 	I am sending him to you for this very purpose, that you may know how we are, and that he may encourage you.
latin dong cammo yeng 	the child now eats and gets satisfied
En ocako gamo ni, “Lapwony, atyeko mako cik magi ducu nia wa i ka tinona.” 	“Teacher,” he declared, “all these I have kept since I was a boy.”
ni, Wod pa dano myero gimiye i ciŋ lubalo, gigure i kom yatariya, ki cer woko i nino me adekke.” 	He is not here; he has risen! Remember how he told you, while he was still with you in Galilee:
joo ogun wii kom woko kwicca ki tai i gutgi gimitto nenno ladit tic 	many people in neck ties have crowded on the chairs outside there waiting to see the manager
dano adii ma gipwoddogi tin? 	how many people were beaten today? 
geg dano pe gubed ka tukko i baar maca 	prohibit the people from playing in that field  
lii pii ki dano me loggo	pour the water for the people for washing their hands
Ka doŋ luker me lobo, ki jo ma pigi dito, ki ludito me mony ducu, lulonyo ki wegi twero ki jo ducu ma i wi lobo, opii ki jo ma gilone kengi, gukanne woko i boro ki i kin got mubar ma i godi ducu, 	Then the kings of the earth, the princes, the generals, the rich, the mighty, and everyone else, both slave and free, hid in caves and among the rocks of the mountains.
Aŋa ma ŋeyo tam ma tye i i dano mukene? Pe cwiny dano-nu ma tye i iye keken aye ŋeyo? Kit meno bene, pe tye ŋat mo ma ŋeyo tam pa Lubaŋa, kono Cwiny pa Lubaŋa keken. 	For who knows a person’s thoughts except their own spirit within them? In the same way no one knows the thoughts of God except the Spirit of God.
arudo yat cam maber mada me cam pa dyel 	young shoots from the stumps of trees are very good food for the goats
En otugi bolo ginarukane woko, ci oa malo, obino bot Yecu. 	Throwing his cloak aside, he jumped to his feet and came to Jesus.
yacce okelliwa lewic mada 	her pregnancy brought shame to us 
Ot ma wubidonyo iye, wubed kunnu, nio ka wubia, wucito giwu. 	Whatever house you enter, stay there until you leave that town.
Ento en oniaŋ ryekogi, openyogi ni, 	He saw through their duplicity and said to them,
yer tikke twerro lyelle maber ka lyedine lakke bit 	his beard can be very well shaved if the razor is sharp
pi meno wuleg Won poto, wek ocwal lutic ka kac. 	Ask the Lord of the harvest, therefore, to send out workers into his harvest field.
pe atwero a malo ka mini gin mo.’ 	I can’t get up and give you anything.’
tye ki jok 	has god's evil spirit 
Me agikkine, utmega, wuket tamwu i kom lok macalo magi: gin ducu ma tye ada, gin ducu ma romo awora, gin ducu ma tye atir, gin ducu maleŋ, gin ducu ma mwonya, gin ducu ma dano pwoyo, ki gin mo maber makato, ma myero apaka. 	And the peace of God, which transcends all understanding, will guard your hearts and your minds in Christ Jesus.
Lupwony-cik ki Luparicayo gucako pennye kekengi, kun giwaco ni, “Man aŋa ma loko lok me yeto Lubaŋa-ni? Aŋa ma twero weko bal, kono Lubaŋa keken?” 	When Jesus saw their faith, he said, “Friend, your sins are forgiven.”
Gibitero iye deyo ki lonyo pa rok ducu. 	The glory and honor of the nations will be brought into it.
Lacen guniaŋ maber ni, Yecu onoŋo pe oloko botgi me gwokke i kom tobi me mugati, ento i kom pwony pa Luparicayo ki pa Lucadukayo 	Then they understood that he was not telling them to guard against the yeast used in bread, but against the teaching of the Pharisees and Sadducees.
cwinywu bicwer, ento cwercwinywu bilokke doko yomcwiny. 	Very truly I tell you, you will weep and mourn while the world rejoices
Gin aryo ducu guriŋo kacel, lapwonnye meno oyomo Petero ki ŋwec, okwoŋo o i lyel. 	So Peter and the other disciple started for the tomb.
nen ka olorro dong canduk maber	go and see if he has shut the door of the box very well
Wumito gin aŋo? Wumito abin botwu ki odoo, nyo abin ki mar ki cwiny me mwolo?	What do you prefer? Shall I come to you with a rod of discipline, or shall I come in love and with a gentle spirit?
Aristako ma lamabuc lawota omotowu, ki Marako okeyo Barnaba ma yam doŋ acikowu pire	They will tell you everything that is happening here.
doŋ acego doggola woko, wan ki litinona doŋ wabuto	The door is already locked, and my children and I are in bed
Pien imako lokka me diyo cwiny i ciro can, an bene abigwoki maber i kare me omo cwiny, ma tye ka bino i kom wi lobo ducu, me temo jo ma bedo i wi lobo-ni. 	Since you have kept my command to endure patiently, I will also keep you from the hour of trial that is going to come on the whole world to test the inhabitants of the earth.
Wuŋeyo ni i kare ma yam onoŋo pud pe wuŋeyo Lubaŋa, noŋo wurwenyo woko ata ka woro cal jogi ma pe loko, ka ma giterowu iye ducu-ni. 	You know that when you were pagans, somehow or other you were influenced and led astray to mute idols.
ngaa ma twerro tello wiwa? 	who can lead us?
wa a ki Kampala laworo 	we came from Kampala yesterday
oragge araga me donynyo i ot kacokke 	he intruded the meeting house
ywek pa nyigge mada oa pi nekko labwor 	he became well known because of killing a lion
en manyen-ni juŋ woko ki kom muti, ci waŋ boŋo yec medde. 	Otherwise, the new piece will pull away from the old, making the tear worse.
Guwek loko lok marac i kom ŋat mo, guwek da, gubed jo ma lukica, lunyut woro bot dano ducu i kare ducu. 	Remind the people to be subject to rulers and authorities, to be obedient, to be ready to do whatever is good,
Tye kit macalo yam gicoyo i ginacoya ni, “Giyeto nyiŋ Lubaŋa i kin Lurok piwu.” 	You who boast in the law, do you dishonor God by breaking the law?
joo mamito oc me mac otyeno, gucit gukel yen 	those who want to warm themselves in the evening, let them bring the firewood
nyeb litino ki tukko odillo ci gibimaarro tukko odilo	interest the children in playing football and in future they will love playing it
Ka man otum, Rwot oyero jo mukene pyerabiro, oorogi ki aryo aryo wek gukwoŋ nyime, me cito i gaŋi ducu ki i kabedo ducu ka ma en kikome bibino iye. 	After this the Lord appointed seventy-two others and sent them two by two ahead of him to every town and place where he was about to go.
pii me lwok tye kwene? 	where is the water for washing?
nanggo woko ni nang nang 	eating all completely 
tyen leelane pe yegge 	the wheel of the bicycle cannot be shaken
Ento en biwaco botwu ni, ‘Awaco botwu ni, pe aŋeyo ka ma wua iye	“But he will reply, ‘I don’t know you or where you come from
pimmo bor me wanglobo meegi 	to measure the boundaries of their land
Ento kare bibino ma ka gikwanyo lanyom woko ki botgi, ka doŋ gibiri kec i kare meno.” 	Jesus answered, “Can you make the friends of the bridegroom fast while he is with them?
ka iketto odokke kama lyet ci leny woko 	if you put the wax in a hot place, it melts 
rwany del wangge ka nen 	evert the eyelkis in order see
Yecu ocako wacogi ni, “Wugwokke, ŋatti mo owek rwenyowu. 	Jesus said to them: “Watch out that no one deceives you.
jany i wii lapwonynye pi potto peny 	contesting arrogantly with his teacher for failure in examination 
wang alii gi yang tye con 	their enmity existed between them before
teer leela bot pundi leela oyubi 	take your bicycle to the mechanic for repair 
lyeto ceng miyo acikari mukene mape gucammo gin mo odiko, ma gucug acugga pi kare malac, ka kurro piny, ginyony ci gipotto piny 	the heat of the sun makes those policemen who have not had breakfast, and have been standing under it for a long time, sink slowly and collapse on the ground
kec tye ka nekko ludito, mal ringo oyot oyot wek gucam 	fry the meat very quickly because the elders are hungry so that they may eat it
Opwonyo i kacokkegi, dano ducu guketo deyo i kome. 	He was teaching in their synagogues, and everyone praised him.
pien dano ducu ma kette kene ni edit gibidwoke piny, ento ŋat ma mwolle kene gibimiye doko dit.” 	For all those who exalt themselves will be humbled, and those who humble themselves will be exalted.”
kot ocwer ma lalelle mol ni lala lala 	it rained so much that the rain water was flowing copiously
dok bene en kwaro pa jo ma gilirogi bene, pe pa dano ma gilirogi alira keken, ento pa jo ma gilirogi ma gilubo bene niye ma yam kwarowa Abraim obedo kwede ma onoŋo pud pe gilire. 	Under what circumstances was it credited? Was it after he was circumcised, or before? It was not after, but before!
Gicoyo i waraga gin ma nyuto lok ma gidote iye ni, “Kabaka pa Lujudaya.” 	The written notice of the charge against him read: the king of the jews.
tye ka tammo gin angoo ma myerro etii 	he is considering what he should do
en pe opoko-yokki ma iyello twatwal kitmeno	he is not a laughing stock person that you should trouble her like that
anyira gucitto ka toddo pii i wang it ma dong cok ka cwiny woko 	the girls have gone to draw the water from the water well which is drying up 
Ento Paulo oyeŋo bade obolo kwede twol i mac ma pe otime gin mo marac. 	But Paul shook the snake off into the fire and suffered no ill effects.
yub cam oyot oyot 	prepare the food quickly 
Lubaga en aye ma oketto lobo ki jami ducu matye iye ka dong oketto dano 	God created the earth and all the things there in and then created human being
jwik cam pa gwokki pien dong ocwee twatwal 	reduce the dog's food because it is very fat now 
twol nanggo lebbe ni mil mil 	the snake moves its tongue restlessly in and out 
Ka Rwot Yecu doŋ otyeko lok kwedgi, ci gitiŋe gitere woko malo i polo, ci ocako bedo piny ka ŋet Lubaŋa atena i kabedo me deyo yo tuŋ acucce. 	After the Lord Jesus had spoken to them, he was taken up into heaven and he sat at the right hand of God.
wotto ni ngik-ngik 	walks with heavy sound on the ground 
camme dong twerro tokke 	the food can now be dished 
gikano te lok man woko botgi, pe gumedo ki ŋeyo lok ma giwaco botgi. 	Its meaning was hidden from them, and they did not know what he was talking about.
Ci okato woko okok ki cwercwiny madwoŋ. 	And he went outside and wept bitterly.
Ka ce Catan ryemo Catan, noŋo opokke i dul aryo i kome kekene	Jesus knew their thoughts and said to them, “Every kingdom divided against itself will be ruined, and every city or household divided against itself will not stand.
jub kweyo ki woko wek Tony i tee ot kany 	collect the sand from outside and bring it and pour it under the house here
giteddo keki ki cukari 	the cakes are cooked with sugar 
dakoni tye ma ojul mada pien gudaa ki cwarre 	the woman is very sulky because she has quarrelled with her husband
En omako bad latin, olwoŋe, owacce ni, “Nyako, a malo.” 	But he took her by the hand and said, “My child, get up!”
Ka guwinyo lok man, ci gibatijagi i nyiŋ Rwot Yecu. 	On hearing this, they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus.
tung pa Okema gi en 	here is the home of Okema 
oa bot wonne 	he came from his father
oyo yogi woko i wii oduur	to throw out the rubbish to rubbish pit
Yam gigura i kom yatariya kacel ki Kricito	“For through the law I died to the law so that I might live for God.
ento wek obed kit macalo gicoyo ni, “Jo ma yam peya gitito botgi lok i kome doŋ gibinene, jo ma yam peya guwinyo pire gibiniaŋ i kome.” 	It has always been my ambition to preach the gospel where Christ was not known, so that I would not be building on someone else’s foundation.
rwang cupiriane woko 	crush or crumple the sauce pan
i cakki me oro layata onnuji gipitto i jwii dong kulu 	at the beginning of the dry season, sweet potatoes are planted in the wet marshy area near the river 
boddo wii dako pa lawotti 	to entice away your friend's wife 
Macalo nene koŋ abako doga boti i kare ma acito i Makedonia, amito koŋ idoŋ i Epeco wek icik jo mogo pe gupwony pwony mo mapat, 	To Timothy my true son in the faith: Grace, mercy and peace from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Lord.
pig wangge tye ka ngoo 	tears are dripping or running from his eyes 
Pe koŋ en biwacce ni, ‘Yubba cam me otyeno, itwe pyeri ikella cam, nio ka an acamo, amato, lacen in ibicamo ibimato’? 	Won’t he rather say, ‘Prepare my supper, get yourself ready and wait on me while I eat and drink; after that you may eat and drink’?
rwoo woko i pyem me rette 	withdrawing from the games of wrestling because of fear or cowardice
jo Baganda gimaarro mada yeago ajaa ka gitye ka myel	the Baganda love very much shaking the rattles when they are dancing
gin dong gingeyo meggi meerro keken, tic bene dong pe 	all they know is being drunk and no work 
pam lakke otwii arii ci omiyo tye ka yelle ki arem 	his molar tooth grew out across and that is why it is-troubling him with pain, toothache
cam ma ocammo ni ullo cwinynye 	they ate too much food today and some of them are now complaining of stomachache 
dano mukene pe gimarro ringo adet	some people do not like fresh meat
laa dogge ngwee 	his saliva smells 
timmo ganyanganya 	he does it badly
Dok owaco ni, ‘Pi tyen lok man dano biweko wonne ki minne ci moko i kom dakone, gin aryo-nu gicako doko kom acel’? 	and said, ‘For this reason a man will leave his father and mother and be united to his wife, and the two will become one flesh’?
ting gunia man iteer kwica 	lift this bag and take it there
kal dong obiiro woko 	the millet has germinated
Pien cik yam gimiyo kun wok ki bot Moses, ento kica ki ada, Yecu Kricito aye okelo. 	Out of his fullness we have all received grace in place of grace already given.
en ngeyo panno buk me lok ma pigi tek 	he knows how to hkie away books of classified matters 
Dano acel acel myero otim kit macalo cwinye mito, laboŋo waŋcwiny mo nyo dic mo. Pien Lubaŋa maro ŋat ma miyo jamine ki yomcwiny. 	Remember this: Whoever sows sparingly will also reap sparingly, and whoever sows generously will also reap generously.
Kadi pud pe wunene, doŋ wumare. Dok bene kombeddi kadi pe wunene, wuye en kun wubedo ki yomcwiny madit ma pe wacce, dok bene me deyo. 	These have come so that the proven genuineness of your faith—of greater worth than gold, which perishes even though refined by fire—may result in praise, glory and honor when Jesus Christ is revealed.
wii dano 	human head 
Alego pi gin	They knew with certainty that I came from you, and they believed that you sent me.
Ka ŋat mo mito tiyo gin ma Lubaŋa mito, en biniaŋ ka ce pwony man oa ki bot Lubaŋa, nyo ka aloko pira kena. 	The Jews there were amazed and asked, “How did this man get such learning without having been taught?”
gweno tye ka tonggo kal 	chicken are pecking millet
dano ma cek layella mada 	a short person is very troublesome 
put okuto woko ki i tyen latin 	pull out the thorn from the child's foot
gakko nngor me agurra  	grinding coarsely cowpeas for making it into soup
I kare ma doŋ onoŋo Kerode oto woko, lamalaika pa Rwot onen bot Yucepu i waŋ lek ki i Ejipt, kun wacce ni, 	After Herod died, an angel of the Lord appeared in a dream to Joseph in Egypt
yoor pii i tee ature wek pe otwoo 	spray the flowers with water to prevent it from drying 
ka apenyowu wun pe wubidokka iye. 	and if I asked you, you would not answer.
guneko mac mager woko, gubwot ki i lak pala lucwan. Gorogi olokke odoko tekkom, gudoko jo matek i lweny, guryemo mony pa lurok woko. 	quenched the fury of the flames, and escaped the edge of the sword; whose weakness was turned to strength; and who became powerful in battle and routed foreign armies.
cok ngide matitinoni me ringo man, ci iteer ited ki litinoni 	collect these pieces of meat, take and cook them for your children 
Ci gugamo ni, “En bineko lupur woko ki kit nek marac atika, ci miyo poto olok woko bot lupur mukene ma gitwero miye nyig olok ka karene oromo.” 	“Therefore, when the owner of the vineyard comes, what will he do to those tenants?”
lawot ma muno okatto kany laworro 	a white traveller passed through here yesterday
tye ka cokko bonggi niogo ma gigollo ma cengu cengu wek cbwoo me bongo me dul wic 	he is mining pieces of the cut clothes so that he may make them into a pillow case  
ringone twero gide maber	the meat can be easily cut very well into pieces
nen ka pii ma lyet tye ma rommo curre i kongo ka wek gimatti 	see if there is hot water that can be pourerd into the dregs of the beer so that it can be drunk
macalo gicoyo i cik pa Rwot ni “Litino kayo ducu ma co gibilwoŋogi maleŋ bot Rwot”, 	(as it is written in the Law of the Lord, “Every firstborn male is to be consecrated to the Lord”),
potto i bal	to fall into sin
pinynye tin lyet twawal 	the weather is very hot today
pak lak palaa man ma bit 	sharpen the edge of this knife very well
bong bongone wek iniag kitte la ber kwede 	feel the cloth in order appreciate how very fine it is 
ocitto kwede ajuru	he went following closely behind him
oonynyo cal i kikopo pong ni maga ma dong oo aoya piny 	he poured the tea into the cup full to the overflowing brim
opici pa Dici tye kwene? 	where is the DC's office? 
yammo ki ywere 	making jokes with his sister-in-law
mon ma ikarre ma yang con ononggo girukko otiko madowong mada i gutgi 	long time ago in the past women used to wear large numbers of beads on their necks
pien waŋa doŋ oneno larri 	For my eyes have seen your salvation,
komme myel ka tic  	he is very eager to work
pien dul mogo myero gubed i kinwu, wek jo ma tye maber gunen woko ka maleŋ. 	No doubt there have to be differences among you to show which of you have God’s approval.
Pe tye ŋat mo ma tye ki mar madit makato man, ni dano miyo kwone pi lureme. 	My command is this: Love each other as I have loved you.
An a kwon me kwo. 	Very truly I tell you, the one who believes has eternal life.
En bidok iye botgi ni, ‘Ada awaco botwu ni, kit macalo pe wutimo bot dano mo acel i kin jo magi matino, pe wutimo bota.’ 	“He will reply, ‘Truly I tell you, whatever you did not do for one of the least of these, you did not do for me.’
en matto taa twatwal 	he smokes tobacco too much
cupuria ne pe ber rwange woko oyot oyot 	the sauce pan is not good, it is easily dented or crumpled 
tiny cinggi ki cet nyim 	clean your hand with dregs of simsim by rubbing it with them
Gin aŋo dok muŋolle i yomcwiny ma onoŋo wubedo kwede-ni? An cadenwu ma aloko ni, ka ce nene twerre, kono wukolo waŋwu woko ci wumiyogi bota. 	As you know, it was because of an illness that I first preached the gospel to you,
Odaŋŋe ki dwan maloŋo calo labwor ma moro dwane	and he gave a loud shout like the roar of a lion
wun litinoni wucitto kwene? 	you children, where are you going? 
latinne dong oputte odonggo odokko awobi 	the child has grown up suddenly to be a boy 
komme onudde 	he is worn out
bok del man nio ka dong odokko ma rep ma yom mada me bongo 	beat the leather until it is flat and very soft for a cloth
lok mo ma tidi mamwa ducu wangge jinynye iye woko 	even for a small mater he screws his eyes about it
Lujudaya gucokke, gurume i dyere, gupenye ni, “Ibimiyo wakalo akala pi kare ma rom mene? Ka in i Kricito ma Lubaŋa oyero, tittiwa atir.” 	and Jesus was in the temple courts walking in Solomon’s Colonnade.
Kit macalo lutkot a ki yo tuŋ wokceŋ ci wil menyo piny wa yo tuŋ potoceŋ, dwogo pa Wod pa dano bene bibedo kit meno. 	For as lightning that comes from the east is visible even in the west, so will be the coming of the Son of Man.
tye ka petto piny pudi 	he is still roaming about 
guniya me nyim man pe twerro tinge ci terre i ot? 	can this bag of simsim not be carried and taken away into the house?
Ento wun wubedo rok ma giyero, ajwagi pa kabaka, rok maleŋ, jo pa Lubaŋa kikome, wek wutit pi tic me deyo pa ŋat ma olwoŋowu nia ki i piny macol wek wudony i leŋone me aura. 	and, “A stone that causes people to stumble and a rock that makes them fall.” They stumble because they disobey the message—which is also what they were destined for.
moone tye? kwene amito wirrone  	where is the oil? I want to apply it on my body
ngat ma obeddo namba adek gimilne mkiila me mola 	the one who came third was given a bronze medal 
kibiritine pe gwerre 	the match stick cannot be struck to produce fire
Pilato openyogi ni, “Wumito mono ni agonnyiwu kabaka pa Lujudaya?” 	“Do you want me to release to you the king of the Jews?” asked Pilate,
Pien Daudi kikome bene owaco i buk me Jabuli ni ‘Rwot owaco bot Rwoda ni, Bed i kom bada malacuc, i kabedo me deyo 	David himself declares in the Book of Psalms: “‘The Lord said to my Lord: “Sit at my right hand
Ka pud tye ka bino i yo, orwatte ki luticce. Guwacce ni, “Latinni doŋ kwo.” 	“Go,” Jesus replied, “your son will live.” The man took Jesus at his word and departed.
lakit nywarre ma wun wutimme kwedde kany ka mukene pe giye 	the way in which you abuse yourselves here, elsewhere it is not acceptable 
oteerro motte me pwoc i kanica pi katto penynye maber 	he took a gift to the church as thanksgiving for passing very well his examinations
ocako daŋŋe matek ni, Ilaro gin aŋo kwedwa kaa, in Yecu Lanajaret? Doŋ ibino ka tyekowa boŋ An aŋeyi, in i dano maleŋ pa Lubaŋa. 	“What do you want with us, Jesus of Nazareth? Have you come to destroy us? I know who you are—the Holy One of God!”
twonno dano dek, cak, cukari kaddi jami meno ducu gitye 	refuses to give food, milk, sugar even when they are available
Ka kono dano man onoŋo pe oa ki bot lubaŋa, kono pe otwero timo gin mo wa acel.” 	Nobody has ever heard of opening the eyes of a man born blind.
Dok nino ducu pe guweko pwonyo dano ki tito lok me kwena maber ni Yecu en aye Kricito ma Lubaŋa oyero i ot pa Lubaŋa ki i paco pa dano.	Day after day, in the temple courts and from house to house, they never stopped teaching and proclaiming the good news that Jesus is the Messiah.
wunen ni jami ducu gitimmo maber 	do see that everything has been done well 
laworo kaka onyoni ayella madit opotto i paco 	yesterday at this time, big trouble happened at home
dano myerro pe beddo ka jiwine ata ata 	people must not hiss without reason
ngoo ma otimme?  	what has happened?
Gin ducu gucamo guyeŋ. Gicoko ŋide cam mudoŋ, opoŋo duku apar wiye aryo. 	“Bring them here to me,” he said.
bemmo dano ci miyo gininno woko 	charms people and makes them sleep 
Pe myero gico nyiŋ dako ma cware oto ma mwaka me ditte peya oromo pyerabicel nono, dok bene myero en obed dako ma yam obedo ki cware acel keken. 	Anyone who does not provide for their relatives, and especially for their own household, has denied the faith and is worse than an unbeliever.
ringgo tic cing woko	running away from manual labour
I kare meno onoŋo Yecu ocaŋo lutwo mapol ma gitye ki arem ki cen maraco, omiyo lutowaŋ mapol guneno piny. 	At that very time Jesus cured many who had diseases, sicknesses and evil spirits, and gave sight to many who were blind.
gin litino pa Lubaŋa, ma gin litino me cer. 	They are God’s children, since they are children of the resurrection.
makko kiniga i komme	feeling very angry with him
cit i ngee ot 	go behind the house
Pi meno en owaco ni, “Ker pa Lubaŋa rom ki gin aŋo? Abiporo ki gin aŋo? 	Then Jesus asked, “What is the kingdom of God like? What shall I compare it to?
pien abedo ka winyo pi marri ki pi niyeni ma itye kwede i kom Rwotwa Yecu ki bot jo pa Lubaŋa ducu. 	I always thank my God as I remember you in my prayers,
abinno an ki komma ni tikiti 	truly I came by myself 
en lye piny caa 	he is down there
Ka Paulo ocuŋ ci ojukogi ki ciŋe kun waco ni, “Jo Icrael, ki wun dano ma wulworo Lubaŋa, wuwiny. 	Standing up, Paul motioned with his hand and said: “Fellow Israelites and you Gentiles who worship God, listen to me!
Waraga man oa ki bot Juda ma latic pa Yecu Kricito, ma omin Yakobo. Bot jo ma Lubaŋa olwoŋogi ma gibedo i mar pa Lubaŋa Won, ma Yecu Kricito tye ka gwokogi. 	The children of your sister, who is chosen by God, send their greetings.
rwenynyo lok woko 	forgetting the matter or forgetting the word
ogollo lok atir 	he made a just judgement
joo ma giwotto labongo waar puny tyengi kak mada 	people who walk without wearing shoes, their heels do crack very much
Jo ducu muye Kricito ma gitye i Babilon ma Lubaŋa oyerogi kacel kwedwu gumotowu, ki woda Marako bene omotowu. 	Stand fast in it.
nywallo latin	to bear a child
pien ka ce dano pe loyo ode kikome maber, ci en twero gwoko lwak jo muye Lubaŋa niŋniŋ? 	not given to drunkenness, not violent but gentle, not quarrelsome, not a lover of money.
Aciki i nyim Lubaŋa ma miyo kwo bot jo ducu, ki i nyim Yecu Kricito, ma otuco niyene maber i kare ma miyo lok me cadenne i nyim Pontio Pilato: 	Take hold of the eternal life to which you were called when you made your good confession in the presence of many witnesses.
gwido lok ni put put 	to talk persistently 
okwe cwinywu, omokwu matek i tic ki i lok ducu mabeco.	encourage your hearts and strengthen you in every good deed and word.
nyom dako wek giworri 	marry so that you may be respected 
kono pe aber kono pe amiiniwu lim	if I was not good, I would not have given you the money
Ŋat mo acel i kin jo Kurete, ma en lanebigi kikome, yam owaco ni, “Jo Kurete kare ducu gin lugoba, lee maraco, luworo ma luwackom.” 	They must be silenced, because they are disrupting whole households by teaching things they ought not to teach—and that for the sake of dishonest gain.
twakko litino matye ka balo pii	scolding the children who are spoiling water 
Yecu odokke iye ni, “Ka ŋat mo mara, en bimako lok mera	Then Judas (not Judas Iscariot) said, “But, Lord, why do you intend to show yourself to us and not to the world?”
opirro kal pong dero 	he filled up the barn with millet up to its brim
Ada awaco botwu ni, i wi lobo ducu ka ma gibitito iye lok man me kwena maber-ri, gin ma dako-ni otiyo bene gibitito pire, wek obed me po en.” 	Truly I tell you, wherever this gospel is preached throughout the world, what she has done will also be told, in memory of her.”
In pe iwiro wiya ki moo, ento en owiro tyena ki moo ma ŋwece kur. 	You did not put oil on my head, but she has poured perfume on my feet.
Ento nia koni Wod pa dano bibedo piny i kabedo me deyo ka ŋet Lubaŋa Won Twer tuŋ lacuc.” 	But from now on, the Son of Man will be seated at the right hand of the mighty God.”
ento en oweko cukane odoŋ, ci oriŋo woko nono laboŋo mo. 	he fled naked, leaving his garment behind.
Lwak madwoŋ gulube, ci ocaŋogi ki kunnu. 	Large crowds followed him, and he healed them there.
Kit yat ducu ma pe nyako nyige mabeco gitoŋo ci gibolo woko i mac. 	A good tree cannot bear bad fruit, and a bad tree cannot bear good fruit.
Ka onoŋo doŋ gucero yeya ma romo mairo adek nyo aŋwen, ci guneno Yecu kun woto i wi nam ki tyene. Lworo omakogi, 	A strong wind was blowing and the waters grew rough.
miyo cam ki dano 	giving food to the people 
Gwok nyo abibedo botwu pi kare manok mo, gwok nyo pi kare me koyo woko ducu, wek wubikonya bene i wotta ka ma abicito iye doki. 	Perhaps I will stay with you for a while, or even spend the winter, so that you can help me on my journey, wherever I go.
lakur gang ocitto kwene? 	where has the home guard gone? 
pien Lubaŋa-wa en aye mac ma waŋo piny.	for our “God is a consuming fire.”
matapwali ma giwanggo ber me gerro odi kato ma lliwoo atwooya ki ceng 	baked bricks is better for building houses than undried bricks
pien jo mapol gibibino i nyiŋa, ma giwacci, ‘An aye a en!’ dok ni, ‘Kare doŋ onyiko cok!’ Pe wulubgi. 	For many will come in my name, claiming, ‘I am he,’ and, ‘The time is near.’ Do not follow them.
An giketa abedo latic me lok me kwena maber pi mot me kica pa Lubaŋa, ma omiya pi tic me twerone. 	which was not made known to people in other generations as it has now been revealed by the Spirit to God’s holy apostles and prophets.
rot kama lee cammo rye 	find out, look for or trace where the animals graze
Lubaŋa pe biculo kwor pa jo ma en oyero, ma gikok bote dyeceŋ ki dyewor? En bigalle ma pe timo gin mo i komgi? 	And will not God bring about justice for his chosen ones, who cry out to him day and night? Will he keep putting them off?
kit macalo yam gicoyo ni, “Lalar bibino kun a ki i Cion, en bikwanyo kit me lworo Lubaŋa woko ki bot Yakobo”	and in this way all Israel will be saved
Ento Petero ocuŋ kacel ki lukwena apar wiye acel, odaŋŋe ki dwan madit kun waco botgi ni, “Wun co me Judaya, ki wun jo ducu ma wubedo i Jerucalem, ber wuŋe lok man, dok wucik itwu ka winyo lokka. 	Then Peter stood up with the Eleven, raised his voice and addressed the crowd: “Fellow Jews and all of you who live in Jerusalem, let me explain this to you; listen carefully to what I say.
ginne pud dong ojigo wiya woko	the thing has so far baffled me
I kare macon ma onoŋo peya wuŋeyo Lubaŋa, wubedo opii pa gin mogo atata ma i adane pe gin lubaŋa wacel. 	Because you are his sons, God sent the Spirit of his Son into our hearts, the Spirit who calls out, “Abba, Father.”
cwkido acwkida 	continue sucking though it is drying up
cupuria en aye agulu nyonyo me teddo cam ki me twommo 	cupuria is a saucepan or a metal cooking pot that is used for cooking and for collecting water 
Ka wanoŋo mel ki kunnu ma cito Poiniki, ci wadonyo iye, wacako wot. 	We found a ship crossing over to Phoenicia, went on board and set sail.
ogwal acel ballo wang pii 	one frog spoils the water well
Man en gin mumiyo yam gitito lok me kwena maber kadi wa bot jo muto, wek kadi giŋolo kop i komgi macalo giŋolo ki jo ducu, gin gubed kwo i cwiny macalo Lubaŋa. 	But they will have to give account to him who is ready to judge the living and the dead.
alegge ni omii an aye abed ladwoo motoka mere ento obwonna woko ni an pe atwerro 	I applied to him that i should be his driver but he thought that I was not suitable
Ento ajwagi madito gukwanyo lim meno kun giwaco ni, “Cik pe ye ni myero giket lim man i kicaa lim me ot pa Lubaŋa, pien giwilo ki remo.” 	When Judas, who had betrayed him, saw that Jesus was condemned, he was seized with remorse and returned the thirty pieces of silver to the chief priests and the elders.
Ka ce en po i kom kit macalo wun ducu wuwinye kwede, ki kit ma wujole kwede ki lworo ki myelkom, mar medde ameda i iye i komwu. 	But just as everything we said to you was true, so our boasting about you to Titus has proved to be true as well.
Doŋ kadi watye i paco kany nyo kunnu, waketo cwinywa me bedo jo ma giyomo cwiny Rwot. 	We are confident, I say, and would prefer to be away from the body and at home with the Lord.
polo tin tye ka moor mada, atamoni tin bicweer ki yamo matek mada 	today the rain is thundering very much, I think it will rain with storm
Ento Yecu omako ciŋe, oile kwede malo, ci en ocuŋ. 	But Jesus took him by the hand and lifted him to his feet, and he stood up.
i kom luditto odig nen i kom joo matye ki pekko me remo	in the adult nose bleeding is occurs in people with blood pressure
Ci gimiyo jor matar bot ŋat acel acel, ka gicikogi ni pud koŋ doŋ guywe pi kare mo manoknok, nio waŋ ma wel lutic wadigi ki utmego ma gibinekogi calo gin ocobbe kakare. 	Then each of them was given a white robe, and they were told to wait a little longer, until the full number of their fellow servants, their brothers and sisters, were killed just as they had been.
gucitto ka giine 	they went to be examined
ngakko lok 	to talk talking in a rude and rough manner
yel omeru pe kiwog miggi kany 	bother trouble your brother, do not bring your foolishness here 
agikkigi bibedo rom ki gin ma gutiyo. 	It is not surprising, then, if his servants also masquerade as servants of righteousness
lobone ber twerro padde me agulu 	the clay is good therefore it can be made or moulded for pots
boko winyo iwang oo	to tell about the nest of a bird around the fireplace
yam a welo, ento pe wujola, onoŋo atye munero ci pe wuruko boŋo i koma, nene koma lit dok abedo i mabuc, ento wun pe wubino ka lima.’ 	I was a stranger and you did not invite me in, I needed clothes and you did not clothe me, I was sick and in prison and you did not look after me.’
Yecu odok iye bot dako ni, “Kono yam iŋeyo mot ma Lubaŋa miyo, dok ka kono iniaŋ i kom ŋat ma kwayi ni, ‘Miya pii, amat-ti’, kono ikwayo en, kono omii pii me kwo.” 	(His disciples had gone into the town to buy food.)
nying pak 	pet name, given to cattle, girls, and women in Bunyoro and Toro it is given to both male and female
otinggo yen mo mabor ma wotto kwedde kun yegge ni niki niki ma dong mitto rette aretta piny 	he carried a long piece of wood which swings up and down almost wanting to throw him down 
Pe wugeŋ Cwiny Maleŋ me tiyo ticce i iwu, 	Do not quench the Spirit.
Ka doŋ gucokke kacel ki ludoŋo, ma doŋ guporo lok, ci gumiyo lim madit bot askari, 	While the women were on their way, some of the guards went into the city and reported to the chief priests everything that had happened.
aboro ma okatto peny nyingge gaa?	what is the name of the eigth child who passed the examination
litino dong gitye ka pakko lakgi me mwoddo ringo pien dong gitye ka bullone 	the children are eager and preparing to eat the meat because it is being grilled 
Onoŋo gitamo ni wun aye myero wubed lutel, ento wun lutowaŋ, pe wuŋeyo gin mo. Wuketo cwinywu i lok ma pe pigi tego, ento wubwoto lok ma pigi tego-gu woko. Meno rom macalo wukwanyo lwaŋo ki i pii amatawu, ento wumwonyo kinaga woko kacel ki pii-nu, pien onoŋo pe wuŋeyo ni tye iye! 	And anyone who swears by heaven swears by God’s throne and by the one who sits on it.
nyik kuca or kwica 	move there nyik cok kany, move or draw near here 
Dok bene wayubbe me keto can i kom dano ducu ma gipe ki winy, ka onoŋo wun doŋ wutyeko mine kenwu i te locwa. 	We demolish arguments and every pretension that sets itself up against the knowledge of God, and we take captive every thought to make it obedient to Christ.
tee ywaat lacoone opong ki yer 	the man's armpit is full of hairs
oyoo lonynyo ola gi pi ringgo iye nino ducu 	the rats make their path by running on it everyday
Pi meno myero doŋ wunek gin ducu me lobo ma tye i iwu, ma gin aye abor, caro, mit me kom, ki par marac ma kelo lewic, ki woro me jami ma rom ki woro jogi. 	When Christ, who is your life, appears, then you also will appear with him in glory.
tamciya i kare macon ononggo gilwonggo ni bwom olik pien obeddo callo bwom olik 	in the past, umbrella was called bwom olik because it resembles a bat's wings
twac piny kenyo 	throw it down there or hurl it down there
i kare me oro pot yadi mapol bokke ci gioo woko 	in the dry season most of the leaves turn brown and later fall off
Ŋat acel acel i kinwa olimo mot me kica, ma oporre ki mot ma Kricito omiye.	one God and Father of all, who is over all and through all and in all.
dano ma lapiya kitmen myerro pe beddo i kin dano 	a person who is a great instigator like that, to make people quarrel or fight, should not be among the people
man lok abwoc mape myero ilokko kany	this is an arrogant and insolent talk which you should not say or speak here
Waraga man oa ki bot Paulo ma lakwena pa Kricito Yecu pi cik pa Lubaŋa Lalarwa ki Yecu Kricito ma genwa ocuŋ i kome. 	Persevere in them, because if you do, you will save both yourself and your hearers.
Myero walubu kit ma myero me dyeceŋ, laboŋo maro tuko marac me yomcwiny marac, ki mero, laboŋo timo abor ki tim mogo me tarwaŋ, laboŋo daa ki nyeko. 	And do this, understanding the present time: The hour has already come for you to wake up from your slumber, because our salvation is nearer now than when we first believed.
Gituco ki doggi ni giŋeyo Lubaŋa, ento dok gikwere woko ki gin ma gitimo	and will pay no attention to Jewish myths or to the merely human commands of those who reject the truth.
citti iwot yen acel ikel  	go and pull out a piece of firewood and bring
man en aye lok ma ibinno kwedde botta ni nget-nget ata ni kitte ducu eno? 	is that all for what you have come to me with such arrogance! 
tud tol aryo eno wek obed mabor 	knot the two ropes to make it long 
mon nino ducu gin aye gimaarro beddo luwol 	women always are the ones who are likely to be poisoners
In i dit ikato kwarowa Yakobo, ma yam omiyowa waŋ it man, ma omato piine, en ki litinone ki lwak limme?” 	Where can you get this living water?
pi cam mabecco mape, omiyo latin ma yang keg owotto maber, onobbe woke 	lack of good food, made the child who was at first walking very well, became weak and unable to walk 
yweer lacoone tidi	the breath of the man is small 
yib gwokke bor ni Iwata Iwata 	the dog's tail is very long and swings about
Laco yam pe giketo pi dako, ento dako aye giketo pi laco. 	neither was man created for woman, but woman for man.
nywakko yoo ki ngati me	to accompany somebody 
obinno lamullo mullo nio ka odonyo kwedde wa i ot pien owillo tyenne woko 	he came crawling upon his knees up to the house, because he dislocated his leg
bongo lajwa can tye kwene?  	bring for me polish for copper or brass
ature yat maca ginynyo kom mada ka iwekko oguddo kommi 	the flowers of that tree cause much irritation of the body if you let them touch your body 
teer man gang  	take this at home
Ento ka dano mo olokke bot Rwot, laum meno kwannye woko matwal. 	Even to this day when Moses is read, a veil covers their hearts.
rubbo kic ki nyuka kal	to mix honey with gruel of millet
gat ma oloyo i tukko gimiyo mkiila me jabu 	one who has won in an athletic championship is given a gold medal 
rweyo dano ka tic, ka dwar nyo ka myel	to go round to ask or to invite people to come to or for work, hunting or dancing
korre tye ka rem mada, gengge tinggo jami mapek	he is having much pain in his chest which is preventing him from carrying heavy things
lakwoo libbe mot mot ka citto ka kwal	a thief walks quietly when going to steal
lok pa ladit mit 	the words of the elder were good, in other words, it was a good talk 
Ka giketo deyo i kom Lubaŋa pire, Lubaŋa bene biketo deyo i kome pire kene, biketo deyo i kome oyotoyot. 	When he was gone, Jesus said, “Now the Son of Man is glorified and God is glorified in him.
Nyo ka olege ni omiye toŋŋweno, ci bimiye oton? 	Or if he asks for an egg, will give him a scorpion?
tol aryo man twerro tudde 	these two ropes can be tied
lworro matek bene kello myel kom 	excessive fear also causes shaking of body
“Ka lobo okwerowu, wuŋe ni yam okwoŋo kwera ma kun peya okwerowu. 	This is my command: Love each other.
Gum man mono tye pi jo ma gilirogi, nyo pi jo ma pe gilirogi bene? Wawaco ni, pi niye omiyo gikwano Abraim ni kite atir. 	Blessed is the one whose sin the Lord will never count against them.”
pien gimaro deyo ma dano keto i komgi makato ma Lubaŋa miyo. 	But because of the Pharisees they would not openly acknowledge their faith for fear they would be put out of the synagogue;
Gwokke keni, dok igwok pwonnyi bene	Be diligent in these matters; give yourself wholly to them, so that everyone may see your progress.
pan bukke woko. kama dano mo pe twerro nonggone 	hide the book in a place where nobody can find it
ii ki tic  	struggling with work
jinno lok me pido ne 	delaying his court case
gitye ka bekko lapena ma otop woko 	the women are picking up the rotten pigeon peas from the good ones 
ento ka odok woko cen, cwinya pe bibedo yom i kome.” 	And I take no pleasure in the one who shrinks back.”
itye ka cimmo gin angoo? 	what are you pointing at? 
In bene latin, gibilwoŋi lanebi pa En Mamalo Twal pien ibitelo nyim Rwot pi yubo yone, 	And you, my child, will be called a prophet of the Most High; for you will go on before the Lord to prepare the way for him,
ocitto pa gak 	he has passed away
Pien Paulo onoŋo omoko ni ebikwaŋ ewok kun ekato Epeco akata, wek pe etyek kare i Acia, pien onoŋo nene rune wek ebed i Jerucalem ka twerre i nino me Pentekote. 	Paul had decided to sail past Ephesus to avoid spending time in the province of Asia, for he was in a hurry to reach Jerusalem, if possible, by the day of Pentecost.
pitto dyangi 	breeding cattle
ni, “Lapwony, Moses yam owaco ni, ‘Ka ce laco mo oto ma pe onywalo latin, ci ominne myero olak dakone, wek onywal kwede litino ma ka-ka ominne.’ 	That same day the Sadducees, who say there is no resurrection, came to him with a question.
akwotta ma i emme dong tye ka too woko 	the swelling in his thigh is decreasing 
baar kany wek laleele omol iye 	open or make a trench here for the rain water to flow well through it
Gicoko ŋide mugati ma obaro-nu mudoŋ, ki rec bene, opoŋo aduku apar wiye aryo. 	and the disciples picked up twelve basketfuls of broken pieces of bread and fish.
latin tye ocung i wii piti caa 	the child is standing there on the old rubbish heap
ento ŋat ma mito bedo ladit i kinwu en aye myero obed laticwu, 	Instead, whoever wants to become great among you must be your servant,
woc pa bongone pe dong okonyo 	its drying did not help 
litino cammo ocunga mada 	the children eat ocunga very much
nyo lukwo, nyo luworo me jami, nyo lumero, nyo luyet dano, nyo luyak, ker pa Lubaŋa pe bibedo megi. 	nor thieves nor the greedy nor drunkards nor slanderers nor swindlers will inherit the kingdom of God.
I gaŋ meno yam tye iye dato mo ma bino bote jwijwi kun wacce ni, ‘Cul kworra i kom lukworra.’ 	And there was a widow in that town who kept coming to him with the plea, ‘Grant me justice against my adversary.’
Gin magi ducu gibitimo i komwu pi nyiŋa, pien pe giŋeyo ŋat ma yam oora. 	If they obeyed my teaching, they will obey yours also.
yiire pe tye	there is no bewitching 
gitye ka peyo lapoya giteerro i ot yat apoya 	they are dragging or drawing with force a mad man and taking him to the mental hospital
muranga cam maber mada pi litino 	beans are ngood food for children
nyab kom gengge nonggo tic 	laziness prevents him from finding job
Mukwoŋo myero wuniaŋ man ni, i kare me agikki jo ma luŋala gibituc ki ŋalagi, kun gilubo mitigi kengi, 	Above all, you must understand that in the last days scoffers will come, scoffing and following their own evil desires.
lapenane twerro yekke nia ki kom nyim man 	the pigeon peas can be separated from this simsim by shaking and picking out peas
lacoo ma kitte rac kit meno twerro tenynye	such a bad husband can be left 
yello lu mabuc pe ber 	molesting the prisoners is not good 
ot ketto cik madit 	an important house for legislation 
Rom ki kodi dek karadali ma dano mo okwanyo, ocoyo i potone	It is like a mustard seed, which a man took and planted in his garden
Macalo ni bene itwero noŋo ka ipenyo dano, wel nino ma okato nia i kare ma acito i Jerucalem ka woro Lubaŋa peya okato apar wiye aryo. 	You can easily verify that no more than twelve days ago I went up to Jerusalem to worship.
Ka ladit ma loyo askari oneno gin ma otimme, opako Lubaŋa kun waco ni, “Ada, dano man kara dano ma kite atir!” 	The centurion, seeing what had happened, praised God and said, “Surely this was a righteous man.”
gitye ka corro lum ni nang nang 	they are pushing through the grass 
Ka onoŋo Yecu odoŋ kene, ci jo murume dyere kacel ki jone apar wiye aryo, gubino gupenye lok i kom carolok meno. 	When he was alone, the Twelve and the others around him asked him about the parables.
Ginacoya ducu ma yam gicoyo, gicoyo pi teko pa Cwiny pa Lubaŋa. Konyo me pwony, me juko dano, me tiro kit pa dano, me nyebo dano wek gulub kit ma atir, 	and how from infancy you have known the Holy Scriptures, which are able to make you wise for salvation through faith in Christ Jesus.
latwoo dong tenne tenne 	the sick man now sits up a bit
pacco dek	to take a good amount of food with fingers
Man aye ŋat ma yam awaco pire ni, ‘I ŋeya bibino ŋat ma kata ki dit, pien en okwoŋo nyima con.’ 	The next day John saw Jesus coming toward him and said, “Look, the Lamb of God, who takes away the sin of the world!
ngat mape tye ki maar rom ki dano ma otoo 	a man who has not got love is like a lead man 
Lukwor pa dano bibedo jo ma i pacone. 	a man’s enemies will be the members of his own household.’
tucco gin ma dano moo otiyo pe ber 	betraying somebody of what he has done is not good
nyamulere en aye gin magikutto mada ki wer joo mukene gilwotjgoni lure 	it is an instrument for music, some other people call it lure
Ento Yecu ka oŋeyo ki i cwinye kene ni lupwonnyene tye ka ŋur i kom lok man, openyogi ni, “Lok man obalo tamwu? 	Who can accept it?”
latinne maarro cwiine kom minne twatwal 	the child likes very much to cling to the mother 
piny oro 	dry season
Ci dano mo acel ki i kin lwak ogamo doge ni “Lapwony, wayi onoŋo akelo woda boti. En tye ki cen marac ma pe loko, 	A man in the crowd answered, “Teacher, I brought you my son, who is possessed by a spirit that has robbed him of speech.
obolo opuk i pii	he has thrown the tortoise into the river
Dano ma tiyo tic pe gimiye mucarane macalo mot, ento gimiye macalo jami ma en otiyo pire. 	What does Scripture say? “Abraham believed God, and it was credited to him as righteousness.”
pura en aye lee ma komme obok makwar 	hartebeest is the animal which its body is reddish brown all over it lives in large numbers
Ento myero wupwo iye Lubaŋa, pien yam wubedo opii me bal, ento doŋ wutye ka lubo kit pwony ma gipwonyowu kwede ni wulube ki cwinywu ducu. 	Don’t you know that when you offer yourselves to someone as obedient slaves, you are slaves of the one you obey—whether you are slaves to sin, which leads to death, or to obedience, which leads to righteousness?
tye ka tammo mada lok ma gitite ni en dano marac 	he is pondering very much about what they say, that he is a bad man
nyang yabbo dongge malac ka dong opong ki Iwangi ci miyo munynyogi woko 	a crocodile opens it's mouth wide and waits until it is full of flies and then swallows them all 
An Paulo acoyo botwu mot man ki ciŋa. Man aye lanen ma tye i waragana ducu	I, Paul, write this greeting in my own hand, which is the distinguishing mark in all my letters
Buriji bene ka pe gikuto i dwan me lwoŋo kikome, ci aŋa ma biyubbe pi cito i lweny? 	Again, if the trumpet does not sound a clear call, who will get ready for battle?
lok ma titkii mo en metto woko dok ko madit 	a very simple matter he turns into a big matter 
mon gibkido donggi ki moo wek pe otwoo 	the women wet their lips with ointment to prevent them drying 
ma omine kene me bedo gin-kok pi jo ducu	For there is one God and one mediator between God and mankind, the man Christ Jesus,
oyo myerro gubed tye kany nen ococ giene 	the rats must be here, look at their holes, here
Pien cik pa Cwiny me kwo ma tye i Kricito Yecu doŋ ogonya woko ki i te cik me bal ki to. 	Therefore, there is now no condemnation for those who are in Christ Jesus,
Ka guwinyo lok man ci gutwarre malo ki kiniga gucako wo matek ni, “Atemi pa jo Epeco dit mada.” 	When they heard this, they were furious and began shouting: “Great is Artemis of the Ephesians!”
Ento waco gin aŋo? Waco ni, “Lok man doŋ tye cok kwedi, tye i dogi ki i cwinyi bene,” ma en aye lok i kom niye ma watito pire-ni. 	“or ‘Who will descend into the deep?’” (that is, to bring Christ up from the dead).
ento wugamo cwiny me bedo litino me paco. Mumiyo wakok ni, “Abba! Wora!” 	The Spirit you received does not make you slaves, so that you live in fear again; rather, the Spirit you received brought about your adoption to sonship
jo ma kwiya piny, jo ma pe genne, pe gitye ki mar i cwinygi, kica bene pe makogi i kom dano. 	slanderers, God-haters, insolent, arrogant and boastful; they invent ways of doing evil; they disobey their parents;
an amitto cuti me yer keken 	I want only woollen suits 
giine me oddi tin tye i gang lai pa lupolici 	housing inspection, is in the police line today 
nyako ma caar en aye maarro nyoggo 	a loose girl is the one who likes to squat 
Ma kun pud lamo gum i komgi, ci opokke woko ki botgi, [gitiŋe, gitere i polo.] 	When he had led them out to the vicinity of Bethany, he lifted up his hands and blessed them.
nyub kwon ki cwaa ka dong imatti 	mix tarmarind juice with kwon and then drink it
ilworro ngoo ma miyo pe icammo camme? 	what are you afraid of that makes you not to eat the food?
ringo romo yom dok mit bene mada 	sheep's meat is soft and very tasty 
Pien ka kono yam Yocwa omiyogi yweyo, kono Lubaŋa pe oloko lacen pi nino mukene. 	For if Joshua had given them rest, God would not have spoken later about another day.
nyeb litino ki tukko odillo ci gibimaarro tukko odilo	popularise the children with football and in future they will love playing football  
labwor man geer mada 	this lion is very fierce 
nyal pe makko jabu  	gold is not affected by rust
wang pa ot olubbe ki rweny pa Onek 	burning of the house followed the disappearance of Onek 
“A malo, kwany latin ki minne, ci idok kwedgi cen i lobo Icrael, pien jo ma onoŋo nene gimito neko latin-ni doŋ guto woko.” 	and said, “Get up, take the child and his mother and go to the land of Israel, for those who were trying to take the child’s life are dead.”
ngat maber 	the one who is good 
I ŋe boŋo kicika me aryo yam tye iye kema ma gilwoŋo ni Kabedo Maleŋ Makato Ducu. 	Behind the second curtain was a room called the Most Holy Place,
Larema ma amaro, alego Lubaŋa omi ibed maber i gin ducu, dok omi komi obed mayot. Aŋeyo ni itye maber i cwinyi. 	The elder, To my dear friend Gaius, whom I love in the truth.
iwacci ngoo? 	what have you said? 
pien lok pa iloko aye bimiyo iloyo kop, ki dok bene lok ma iloko aye bimiyo giŋolo kop loyi.” 	A good man brings good things out of the good stored up in him, and an evil man brings evil things out of the evil stored up in him.
kweyo ma ocullo wang it twerro golle maber 	the sand that has blocked the water well can be dug and removed
Ci dako-nu oa oriŋo woko i dye tim, ka ma Lubaŋa oyubo iye kabedo pire, ka ma gibibedo ka pite iye pi nino alip acel ki miya aryo ki pyerabicel. 	The woman fled into the wilderness to a place prepared for her by God, where she might be taken care of for 1,260 days.
Wun wukelo jo man ma pe guyako gin mo ki i ot jok, pe bene guyeto lubaŋawa ma dako-ni. 	You have brought these men here, though they have neither robbed temples nor blasphemed our goddess.
Ci guyete kun giwaco ni, “In giri aye lapwonnyene ento wan giwa lupwonnye pa Moses. 	Then they asked him, “What did he do to you? How did he open your eyes?”
Latin tye ka lubbo tic pa wonne 	the child is pursuing his father's protession
kella anyogi nyo pul me amwodda 	bring for me some maize or groundnuts for eating,
watiyo la wang acel	we worked together or we worked at once
amito ni ka twerre kono akwanyo ayelayela meno woko ki i komwu. 	But those who marry will face many troubles in this life, and I want to spare you this.
pe i bod wii latin woko ki liwan 	do not distract the child from schooling or studying
labolo cek oyot oyot mada 	the banana ripens very quickly
Cimeon doŋ otito kit ma Lubaŋa okwoŋo nyuto kwede ni eparo pi Lurok kun okwanyo ki i kingi lwak ma gilwoŋo ki nyiŋe. 	Simon has described to us how God first intervened to choose a people for his name from the Gentiles.
wacittu i otel kama ka nammo maber tye iye 	let us go to the hotel where there is a good place for passing time
wacittu paco ka larro lokke 	let us go home to discuss the matter 
twee mukene bene kello rwee dwan 	other diseases also cause hoarse voice
lokke onywanne kingi gin aryo 	the matter is mixed up between the two of them
Arac lacollo maber mada pien miyo mon nywal oyot oyot ki botte ka en ma ocollo 	Arac is a good midwife because she makes the women deliver quickly when they are under her care
man en aye tyen acel ma gin ma kit eno otimme kany	this is the first time that such a thing has occurred here
lok ma ilokko ki coc bene maicoyo ducu gubeddo arwii 	what you said and what you wrote is all awkward and wrong 
in tika inenno dano maber ki wanggi ma opalle ni 	do you really see peple well with your squinted eyes? 
Paulo onoŋo mito cito ka donyo i dye lwak, ento lupwonnye pe guye. 	Paul wanted to appear before the crowd, but the disciples would not let him.
En otugi tero lok bot jo ma yam gibedo kwede, i kare ma gitye ki cola ki kumu-gu. 	She went and told those who had been with him and who were mourning and weeping.
kit rac pa latinni twerro jukke	the bad behaviour of this child can be prevented 
awobe myerro pe wulokko lok ma gunynyo i luditto 	boys you should not speak things which cause indignation to elders
gin ki laminwa Apia, ki Arkipo askari wadiwa, ki jo muye Kricito ma gicokke i odi: 	Paul, a prisoner of Christ Jesus, and Timothy our brother, To Philemon our dear friend and fellow worker—
tim acac acac pe ber	careless behavior is not good
beddo awedda 	seating carelessly and indecently
Kit ryeko macalo meno pe oa ki i polo ento obedo me lobo, pe woro lubaŋa, ento pa Catan. 	Such “wisdom” does not come down from heaven but is earthly, unspiritual, demonic.
anenne bene ka lega i kanica laworo 	I saw him also yesterday in the churh when he came for prayer
dok me miyo kit ma en ocobo kwede yub mere me muŋ onen woko ka maleŋ bot jo ducu. Onoŋo Lubaŋa mucweyo jami ducu-ni okano muŋ man pi kare ducu mukato aŋec, 	Although I am less than the least of all the Lord’s people, this grace was given me: to preach to the Gentiles the boundless riches of Christ,
Ka wadikke kunnu pi nino mapolpol, lanebi mo ma nyiŋe Agabo obino kunnu nia ki i Judaya. 	After we had been there a number of days, a prophet named Agabus came down from Judea.
yito tye ka duny ki i ot 	the smoke is coming out of the house or rising out from the house 
Acoli wacci ka iribbo cam ki neru ci puc makki 	Acholi says that if you share food with your uncle, you get warts 
Cutcut lumalaika abiro ma onoŋo gitye ki tum abiro-ni guyubbe doŋ me kutone. 	Then the seven angels who had the seven trumpets prepared to sound them.
acut opong kwica, gwok nyo tye lee mo ma otoo kuno	there are many vultures there, perhaps there is a dead animal there
tim me Jerre mada, in dano madit me citto ka butto i kin litino 	it is a shameful thing for you, an adult to go to sleep among the children
lwangi mokko mada i obworo pyen 	the flies do get entangled very often in the cobwebs 
Pien kwon pa Lubaŋa en kwon ma bino piny nia ki i polo, ma miyo kwo ki lobo.” 	Our ancestors ate the manna in the wilderness; as it is written: ‘He gave them bread from heaven to eat.’”
“Ka yam abaro i mugati abiro pi jo alip aŋwen-ni, onoŋo wucoko ŋide opoŋo adita adi?” Dok gugamo ni, “Abiro.” 	“And when I broke the seven loaves for the four thousand, how many basketfuls of pieces did you pick up?” They answered, “Seven.”
Wan mono wabiwaco lok aŋo i kom Abraim, ma en aye kwarowa i kit me kom-mi? 	“Who has ever given to God, that God should repay them?”
gimaarro ocunga mada omiyo wa i i Ododo pa Acoli tye iye ododo kom anyira apar, ma gucitto ka pwonno ocunga	ocunga is very much liked, that is why it is even in the Acholi tales there is a tale about ten girls who went to collect the ocunga
bin i nino me abic 	come on Friday
Kadi gin ma gilirogi-ni pe gimako cik, ento gimito ni gilirwu ka wek giwakke i gin ma gitimo i kom ki woko. 	See what large letters I use as I write to you with my own hand!
nyel dong mwodo ma olakki 	trim the edge of the grass which has overgrown its edge
“Ento wun jo ma winyo, awaco botwu ni, Wumar lukworwu, wutim ber bot jo ma dagwu. 	“But to you who are listening I say: Love your enemies, do good to those who hate you,
giwotto ma gugollo ciggi kacel pien gitye ki maar madowong mada 	they walk with their hands hooked together because they are in great love 
jii ringo man ma okwokki ka dong ital ka wek obed maber 	half cook this bad meat and then smoke it in order that it may be good 
macalo owaco bene ka mukene ni, “In ibedo ajwaka nakanaka, i kit pa Melkijedek.”	And he says in another place, “You are a priest forever, in the order of Melchizedek.”
Ento dano me lobone gukwere, gucwalo lukwena i kore ki lok ni, ‘Pe wamito dano man olowa.’ 	“But his subjects hated him and sent a delegation after him to say, ‘We don’t want this man to be our king.’
En owaco lok man, pe ni en paro pi lucan, ento pien en yam lakwo, yam gwoko kicaa lim, ci kwanyo gin ma gibolo iye. 	“Why wasn’t this perfume sold and the money given to the poor? It was worth a year’s wages.”
anyogi odonggo ma potgi beddi waka waka 	the maize have grown very well with their leaves shaking about with wind
ngii gin angoo matye ka yello latinni 	find out what is bothering the child
dano ducu ma ngeyo piny myerro pe obed ka nyebbe me matto arege 	any wise person must not indulge in drinking local gin
Yecu ogamo ni, “Ibimiyo kwoni pira? Adada awacci ni, twon gweno pe bikok, nio ka koŋ ikwera tyen adek.	Peter asked, “Lord, why can’t I follow you now? I will lay down my life for you.”
Akot tye ki nyig mukene me pakke, Lapolo, Akot 	Lapolo, Akot has another name which is called Lapolo, Akot
gwokke odok ma i kom doggola ni koni patte woko i kom bongoni 	take care, the glue that is on the door might get stuck on your clothes
Ka doŋ tye kit meno, ci Lajudaya kato jo mukene-gu ki ŋo? Nyo kony me lirre kono gin aŋo? 	Thanks be to God, who delivers me through Jesus Christ our Lord! So then, I myself in my mind am a slave to God’s law, but in my sinful nature a slave to the law of sin.
wot igik kany 	walk and end here
lokke twerro jinne 	the case can be delayed 
adig man pe gicweyo maber wangge lac twatwal pe diggo kongo maber	this straing sack is too coarse, it does not strain well 
Owiny lagogga mada, owekko laworo omiyo wanyerro twatwal 	the hoes with an L-shaped handle cultivate very well compared to hoes with a straight handle or shaft
gud bongone ki cinggi ka wek iniang berre	feel the garment with your fingers in order to appreciate it's quality
pillo wii latin nyo wii dako	to spoil by over indulging a child or the wife
ringo abwori mit callo ringo dyang	the eland's meat is just as tasty as cattle's meat
pamba man ducu twerro cungge i gonia man 	till this cotton can be pushed into this gunny sack
latin kwan myerro kong pe obed ki tam me yacco nyako mo ma pud peya otyekko kwanne 	a student must not think of impregnating a girl before completing his studies
jub kweyo ki woko wek iony i tee ot kany 	collect the sand from outside and bring it and pour it under the house here
Wun ma amaro, abako doga botwu macalo wun wel, pe wun jo me lobo man, wukwer miti me kom woko ma lwenyo ki tipowu. 	But you are a chosen people, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, God’s special possession, that you may declare the praises of him who called you out of darkness into his wonderful light.
Utmegiwa, wutwero po kit ma ceŋ wacanne kwede i tic, i kare ma watittiwu lok me kwena maber ma oa ki bot Lubaŋa, kun watiyo dyeceŋ ki dyewor wek pe waket peko i kom ŋat mo i kinwu. 	Surely you remember, brothers and sisters, our toil and hardship; we worked night and day in order not to be a burden to anyone while we preached the gospel of God to you.
ma yam oto piwa, ni wek kadi ka waneno nyo wanino, wabibed kwo kacel kwede. 	He died for us so that, whether we are awake or asleep, we may live together with him.
ento minne ogamo ni, “Pe kit meno, gibilwoŋe ni Jon.” 	but his mother spoke up and said, “No! He is to be called John.”
Pe imi ŋat mo ocayi ni pien in pud itidi, ento bed lanen maber bot jo muye, i lokki, i kiti, i mar, i niye, ki i bedo maleŋ laboŋo gin marac mo i komi. 	Command and teach these things.
nyekko omakke 	he is full of jealousy 
en aye latin ma olimmo mot pi yommo luwotte ducu i ngwec 	he is the child who got the prize for surpassing all his friends in running 
Acoyo lok man botwu, wun jo muye nyiŋ Wod pa Lubaŋa, wek wuŋe ni wutye doŋ ki kwo ma pe tum. 	I write these things to you who believe in the name of the Son of God so that you may know that you have eternal life.
lupoya gicammo cam mo kama gunoggo iye kadi ma i wii odur 	the mad people eat any food where they find it even in the garbage pits
or bwong dyel	for service you get a young she-goat
pien onoŋo peya obino i kom ŋat mo i kingi, ento yam gibatijagi i nyiŋ Yecu keken. 	because the Holy Spirit had not yet come on any of them; they had simply been baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus.
Nen, doŋ atyeko tito botwu con. 	See, I have told you ahead of time.
Ka doŋ gimoko ni doŋ wakwaŋ wacit i Itali, gimiyo Paulo ki lumabuc mukene i ciŋ ladit mo ma nyiŋe Julio ma lalo dano miya i kin dul mony ma gilwoŋo ni pa Augucito. 	When it was decided that we would sail for Italy, Paul and some other prisoners were handed over to a centurion named Julius, who belonged to the Imperial Regiment.
camme mit mada 	the food was very nice 
Lupwonnyene gudok iye ni, “Kara man, dano twero miyo mugati ma romo dano-ni i tim kany niŋniŋ?” 	His disciples answered, “But where in this remote place can anyone get enough bread to feed them?”
burre pud dig ci ento twerro gworre 	the hole is still narrow but it can be widened 
goyo eel lworro gang  	building the fence to enclose the home
I kare ma Kepa obino i Antiokia ajuke woko atyer ka maleŋ pien onoŋo otimo gin ma pe ber. 	All they asked was that we should continue to remember the poor, the very thing I had been eager to do all along.
Utmegina, amito wuniaŋ lok i kom mot ma Cwiny Maleŋ miyo. 	Now about the gifts of the Spirit, brothers and sisters, I do not want you to be uninformed.
Ento en odok ki gin ni, “Ŋat ma ocaŋa aye owacca ni, ‘Kwany gibutoni, iciti.’ ” 	and so the Jewish leaders said to the man who had been healed, “It is the Sabbath; the law forbids you to carry your mat.”
gimitti kany ento in inyedde meeri tegge kwica 	you are wanted here but you are sitting aloot there without concern 
Ada, cik magi nen calo tye iye ryeko pi keto cik me woro Lubaŋa ma wun wuroto giwu piwu kenwu, dok pi mwolle ken me yelo kom i can, ento pe konyo kadi ki acel me loyo mit me kom.	These rules, which have to do with things that are all destined to perish with use, are based on merely human commands and teachings.
gucitto ka lokko pii i agulo mukene 	they went to change the water into another pot
Petero ocako penyo Yecu ni, “Lapwony, bedo kany ber mada	Peter said to Jesus, “Rabbi, it is good for us to be here
Ma ka meno, myero walok lok ada ki mar, wek wamedde, wadoŋu malo i kit yo ducu nio bot Kricito, ma en aye lawiwa.	until we all reach unity in the faith and in the knowledge of the Son of God and become mature, attaining to the whole measure of the fullness of Christ.
wek alloki atyer ka wek iwiny 	let me speak to you frankly so that you may hear
nyekko yelle, nyo nyekko nekke 	he is being troubled by jealousy or suffering from jealousy or he is envious or full of envy
Pien en omiyowu mot me kica pi Kricito, pe mot me ye en keken, ento me neno can pire bene. 	This is a sign to them that they will be destroyed, but that you will be saved—and that by God.
Kadi bed kit meno, jo mapol ma i kin luloc bene guye en, 	Isaiah said this because he saw Jesus’ glory and spoke about him.
teerre tye kwene? 	where is his load? 
Matidine owaco bot wonne ni, ‘Aba, miya dul lim ma ka mera.’ Wongi opoko limme i kingi. 	The younger one said to his father, ‘Father, give me my share of the estate.’ So he divided his property between them.
I kare ma dano guyete, en pe oyetogi. I kare ma en oneno can, pe oburo dano	“He committed no sin, and no deceit was found in his mouth.”
lim ma dong orweny pe twerro yenynye 	the money that is lost cannot be looked for
gwokke mada pe iteer pil wii kuno pien giryammi cut 	be very careful, do not take your arrogance there because they will send you away at once 
bin kong wek agulli gin ma otimme 	come and let me confide to you what happened 
en latic ma laworro mada  	he is a very humble and obedient servant
mon gubinno ma gurukko gangi igutgi  	the women came wearing cowrie shells around their necks
Onen tye ka juyo litinone ni pe myerro gumat kongo macallo litino pa joo mukene  	Onen is telling ordering his children not to drink beer like other people's children
gki en aye yoo acel me nenno kace latin komme yot 	tickling is one way of finding out whether the child is healthy
Ento Yecu olokke owaco bot Petero ni, “Dok cen i ŋeya, in Catan! Idoko ariya woko bota, pien tammi pe lubo pa Lubaŋa, ento pa dano.” 	Jesus turned and said to Peter, “Get behind me, Satan! You are a stumbling block to me; you do not have in mind the concerns of God, but merely human concerns.”
cak lukulo ber mada ki litino 	coagulated milk is very good for the children
Ma ginywale ki kom en kom, ma ginywale ki Cwiny en cwiny. 	Jesus answered, “Very truly I tell you, no one can enter the kingdom of God unless they are born of water and the Spirit.
dano myerro guwiny juc pa luditto ticgi	the people must obey the reprimand from their masters
en dong lye ki ngic me gicco 	he has got the experience of the cold
wamitto gitittr adek me tinggo lutwoo 	we want three stretchers for carrying the patients
Okelo okummo mada pi too pa mine 	Okelo is very much depressed because of the death of his mother
Ento Elima ma latyet (meno aye te lok me nyiŋe) ocako pyem kwedgi kun mito ŋako laloyo woko ki i niye. 	But Elymas the sorcerer (for that is what his name means) opposed them and tried to turn the proconsul from the faith.
aweno bene dong twerro pitte i gang 	the guinea fowls can also be reared at home
ogoyo wiye woko ni pac  	he hit his head and lacerated it
Pe wuŋeyo bene ni wan aye ma wabiŋolo kop i kom lumalaika? Ento kop ma mako kwo ma watye iye-ni kono? 	Do you not know that we will judge angels? How much more the things of this life!
ka kulu omol ki tek i kome, oyotoyot opoto, ogannye woko piny lirubuku.”	The moment the torrent struck that house, it collapsed and its destruction was complete.”
latin ngokko gin angoo? 	what is the child vomiting? 
adyel adyel kok callo twon dyel ma tye ka tiggu	the crying voice of ibis adada is like that of the he goat when mounting a she goat
ocako pwonyogi doki, macalo kit pwonnye tye kwede. 	Again crowds of people came to him, and as was his custom, he taught them.
Owaco bot jo ma gucuŋ ka ŋete ni, ‘Wugam ciliŋ miya-ni woko ki bote wumi bot won ciliŋ alip acel-li.’ 	“Then he said to those standing by, ‘Take his mina away from him and give it to the one who has ten minas.’
tye ka luggu alugga pien minne otoo 	he is depressed because of the death of his mother
lok ma ilokkoni wanggo cwinygi mada 	what you said annoyed them very much 
nyuka ka oton icip pe dok nange	porridge that has dropped on a woman's string apron can not be licked
ka oballo gin mo ci gitwerro pwodde 	if he has spoilt anything, he can be caned 
agul gul matye i kincekke gukwot woko ci lit mada 	the lymph nodes in his groin are swollen and painful
litino gitye celle ki abutkia 	the children are throwing stones at each other using stones and catapults
In dako, iŋeyo niŋniŋ ka ibilaro cwari? Nyo in laco, iŋeyo niŋniŋ ka ibilaro dakoni? 	How do you know, wife, whether you will save your husband? Or, how do you know, husband, whether you will save your wife?
tim ber cwalla buk ma laworo aleggi pireni 	please send me the book which I asked for yesterday
Jo ma gumako Yecu gutere bot Kayapa ajwaka madit pa Lubaŋa, ka ma onoŋo lupwony-cik ki ludoŋo-gu gucokke iye. 	Those who had arrested Jesus took him to Caiaphas the high priest, where the teachers of the law and the elders had assembled.
en aye tongge latin atika ma ngeyo lok ma kunno 	he is the real child ot that home who knows what is there
yoor pii poto nyanya 	sprinkle or spray water on the tomatoes field
i lobo mapol i Apirika litino ma tino me mwaka acel nio wa i abic giwotto munero 	in many parts of Africa, the children from one to five years walk naked 
cam pe remmogi i ganggi 	food is never sufficient in their home 
meeyi pud ocitto woko loka nam, ka kwan 	your secret girlfriend has at the moment, gone overseas, to study 
Ento Petero ogamo ni, “Nye, an akwiya lok ma itye ka wacone-ni.” Cutcut ma pud en waco lok man, twon gweno otugi kok. 	Peter replied, “Man, I don’t know what you’re talking about!” Just as he was speaking, the rooster crowed.
gin maraccu ma timme i gang kany myerro ogik woko 	the bad things that do happen in this home must stop 
dek ma ocammoni dok olemmo cwinynye 	the food he ate made him feel nauseated 
wek kong awac lokke ma pud peya kiaa iye 	let me first tell you the case before you quarrel about it
Ci cutcut gutugi weko obwogi, gulubo kore. 	At once they left their nets and followed him.
Doŋ wadoko lumiŋ pi Kricito, ento wun wuryek i Kricito. Wan wagoro, ento wun wutek. Giketo deyo i komwu, ento wan gicayowa acaya. 	We are fools for Christ, but you are so wise in Christ! We are weak, but you are strong! You are honored, we are dishonored!
lamerro moni opotto en  	a drunken man has fallen here
yub ka beddo meeri pat pe wurib ka beddo 	prepare for yourself a separate place, do not share the place
omat me mutoka ina Okot owillo dong mitto nekke woko 	the pride of having a car is almost killing him
pe doŋ giŋeyo gin ma myero gidokke iye. 	They did not know what to say to him.
Myero koŋ gikwoŋ tito lok me kwena maber bot rok ducu. 	And the gospel must first be preached to all nations.
Ka gimoko mac i dyekal, ma gubedo piny kacel, Petero bene obedo piny i kingi. 	And when some there had kindled a fire in the middle of the courtyard and had sat down together, Peter sat down with them.
ngat ma tye ki cwiny me nek pe dano me nino ducu ento wiye nonggo oballe woko, lapoya 	a man who has the spirit of killing is not a normal person but a mental case, a mad man
gunia mukene ducu dong mitto awangga 	all the other gunny bags need to be burnt
coo poto 	the field's boundary
cat ma tye i kin Jeremel ki Uganda pud tkii mo 	trade between Germany and Uganda is still small
nyakoni dong opittu 	this girl is now fully grown up (and having menses)
citto ka nyoyo jami 	going to sell things 
Dok bene dano ma pe tiŋo yatariyane kun lubo kwede kora pe myero me bedo danona. 	Whoever does not take up their cross and follow me is not worthy of me.
bur tye i puny tyenne ma lacam 	there is an ulcer on his left heel
wino omakko dako woko 	the woman has failed to get rid of the cord of the placenta or part of it
dony wunu i ot ka cam 	enter the house to eat 
olemmo cukarine ka lim 	he licked the sugar to taste whether it was sweet
Owaco botgi ni, “Kac tye dwoŋ, ento lukac aye nok	He told them, “The harvest is plentiful, but the workers are few
miya awara taa meeri wek amatti 	give me some of your dried tobacco leaves so that I may smoke
wek gupidde ki kunnu. 	They can press charges.
guti madongo ma ocung atir gin aye gibecco me geddo 	big and straight poles are the ones which are good for buildings 
citto ka meddo pwonynye ne i dongge 	going to increase his knowledge in boxing 
Ci lee makwo aŋwen-ni gugamo ni, “Amen!” cutcut ludoŋo guryebbe piny guworo Lubaŋa ki Latin romo.	The four living creatures said, “Amen,” and the elders fell down and worshiped.
Aŋeyo ni cikke en kwo ma pe tum	For I did not speak on my own, but the Father who sent me commanded me to say all that I have spoken.
Acikowu kun bene atye ki lok mogo ma cwinya pe yom iye i komwu, pien cokkewu-ni gin mo ma konyo pe iye, kelo bal keken. 	In the following directives I have no praise for you, for your meetings do more harm than good.
otimme ning ning? 	how did it happen? 
kal dong obirro me tobi 	millet has germinated and now is ready for leaven
pucgi me kom ot pe ber 	their plastering of the walls of the house is not good
me aryone, 	The second
otte oculle katto mukene ducu 	the house is taller and bigger than the others 
wek iniaŋ ada me lok meno ma yam gipwonyi kwede. 	so that you may know the certainty of the things you have been taught.
tuko bac me bayo tong kama bor 	javelin throwing game,
twoo abaji kwotto cogo bad ci miyo gouge woko	the syphilitic infection of the arm bone, makes it big and deformed
me lawee 	junyu is a good tree for the brooms
tye cupa cak ma nok 	there are a few bottles of milk
I kare meno Jon Labatija obino kun tito lok i tim me Judaya, 	They looked for a way to arrest him, but they were afraid of the crowd because the people held that he was a prophet.
Tye doŋ jami aryo ma pe dok lokke, ma Lubaŋa pe twero bwolo iye dano. Pi man, wan jo ma wariŋo walaro bote watye ki gin ma cuko cwinywa matek wek wamak gen ma giketo i nyimwa. 	God did this so that, by two unchangeable things in which it is impossible for God to lie, we who have fled to take hold of the hope set before us may be greatly encouraged.
oree oketo latin i ic	joking with a brother's wife pregancy
lacoone nino ducu myenne twatwal, wacittu wawekke odong kenynyo 	the man always delays too much, let us go and leave him there
Lwak ma gucuŋ ka ŋete guwinyo, ci guwaco ni, “Polo omor.” Jo mukene ni, “Lamalaika oloko kwede.” 	Father, glorify your name!” Then a voice came from heaven, “I have glorified it, and will glorify it again.”
gin gueoo tin	they are arriving today 
min dyelle ber mada tiku goyo rudi keken	the goat is very good because it always gives birth to twins
Yecu ociko matek ni pe gitit pire ki dano mo. 	Jesus warned them not to tell anyone about him.
kwac bene wotto ni Iwe Iwe callo bura 	the leopard also walks noiselessly like the cat
Yam abedo kwedwu ma agoro, abedo ki lworo madwoŋ, koma bene omyel matek. 	I came to you in weakness with great fear and trembling.
Man aye gin mumiyo giwaco ni, “Co woko, in ma inino, cer woko ki i kin jo muto, ci Kricito bimenyi.” 	It is shameful even to mention what the disobedient do in secret.
Ento bot jo ma gilwoŋogi, Lujudaya ki jo Grik, Kricito obedo tek ki ryeko pa Lubaŋa. 	but to those whom God has called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ the power of God and the wisdom of God.
ka dwogo ma onyiko cok ki ot, owinyo wer ki myel. 	When he came near the house, he heard music and dancing.
litino ma tino myerro gipwonygi tukko ngwec mada wek i anyim gubed lungwec maguywek mada 	young children should be trained very well how to run so that in future they will be great runners
kel pil me amatta 	bring some water for drinking 
winyone pud peya otoo pien pud pappe 	the bird is not yet dead because it is still flapping its wings
Jo ma giworo Lubaŋa aye guyiko Citefano, kun gikoke matek twatwal. 	Godly men buried Stephen and mourned deeply for him.
En con tye i lobo, en aye ceŋ otiyo lobo, ento lobo pe obedo ki ŋec i kome. 	The true light that gives light to everyone was coming into the world.
kadi okwer kombedi, lacen en bitimmone 	although he has refused now, in the end he will have to do it
ci ociko waŋe matek, waŋe odok kakare ma neno piny maber. 	Then his eyes were opened, his sight was restored, and he saw everything clearly.
minne openye ni, “Latinna, piŋo itimowa kit man? Nen woru ki an wabedo ka yenyi kun wakumo.” 	His mother said to him, “Son, why have you treated us like this? Your father and I have been anxiously searching for you.”
Orwone ka guwoto guo cok ki gaŋ ma gicito iye-ni, ci Petero oito i wi ot malo ka lega i kin cawa abicel. 	About noon the following day as they were on their journey and approaching the city, Peter went up on the roof to pray.
wangga yoo me tyen en aye ber 	the footpath is the one that is good
karakap en aye waar ma gipayo nia ki i kom yat 	wooden clog is carved out from the wood
lamyenne dannone lamyenne mada pe binno oyot oyot ka imitto citto kwedde kamo 	when you want to go with the man somewhere he does not come quickly, he is always moving about, and about nothing 
ceng ryeny matek twatwal i dwee me Janari 	it shines very much in the month of January
Yecu ka owinyo man, ci ouro twatwal, olokke bot lwak ma lube, owaco botgi ni, “Atito botwu ni, peya anoŋo niye ma rom ki man, kadi i Icrael.” 	When Jesus heard this, he was amazed at him, and turning to the crowd following him, he said, “I tell you, I have not found such great faith even in Israel.”
cilig acel en aye as iye cente miya acel 	one shilling consists of one hundred cents 
lapwony ocitto ka pwonynyo litino	the teacher has gone to teach the children
puc nen mada i kor ki i gut 	warts are frequently seen on the chest and the neck 
cok litino kacel wek gimiigi cam 	gather the children together so that they may be given food 
an alur pe atwerro nywallo latin mo 	I am barren I cannot give birth to a child 
Doŋ ŋat acel acel ma tye ki gen man ma omoko i kom Kricito, lonnye kene bedo maleŋ, macalo Kricito bene leŋ. 	All who have this hope in him purify themselves, just as he is pure.
Epapira mabuc wadiwa i Kricito Yecu omoti, 	And one thing more: Prepare a guest room for me, because I hope to be restored to you in answer to your prayers.
joo ma giwotto labongo waar puny tyengi kak mada	people who walk barefooted, their heels do crack very much  
Ento ka kare me po pi nywalo Kerode oromo, ci nya pa Kerodia omyelo i nyim welo ci oyomo cwiny Kerode mada. 	Herod wanted to kill John, but he was afraid of the people, because they considered John a prophet.
Ento ka Lacuŋudwar bibino, ma abioro botwu nia ki bot Won, ma en aye Cwiny me ada ma a ki bot Won, en bibedo cadenna. 	But this is to fulfill what is written in their Law: ‘They hated me without reason.’
litino gitye ka mwoddo latutu kiyata 	the children are eating the raw small undeveloped sweet potatoes
wir wii mutoka odok tung lacam  	turn the head of the motor car to the left
Lacen gimiya lagada me pimo piny, ma obedo calo odoo, ci giwacca ni, “A icit ipim ot pa Lubaŋa, keno tyer, ki jo ma giworo Lubaŋa i ode. 	I was given a reed like a measuring rod and was told, “Go and measure the temple of God and the altar, with its worshipers.
Catan bene ka opokke kene i dul aryo, ci kerre bicuŋ niŋniŋ? Pien wun wuwaco ni aryemo cen pi twero pa Beeljebul. 	If Satan is divided against himself, how can his kingdom stand? I say this because you claim that I drive out demons by Beelzebul.
moonne meegi rac mada ma gegnogi cam kacel 	the enmity between them is very serious, it prevents them from eating tongether
An kikoma onoŋo pe aŋeye, ento pi lok man omiya abino kun abatija dano ki pii, wek ginyute bot jo Icrael.” 	This is the one I meant when I said, ‘A man who comes after me has surpassed me because he was before me.’
pe konynyo me jug i ot 	it is of no use hiding in the house
cwinynye tek 	he is brave or courageous 
lacoone ngeyo kit yoo ducu me lwiyo 	the man knows all the ways i methods of escaping 
jwaa lakwu ki oyado pien en aye jwayo lak maber mada 	brush your teeth with oyado because it brushes the teeth very well
Coc ma yam gicoyo wacci, “Ka ce bedo tek bot dano ma kite atir me larre, doŋ labalo ma pe lworo Lubaŋa binene ka kwene?” 	For it is time for judgment to begin with God’s household; and if it begins with us, what will the outcome be for those who do not obey the gospel of God?
lub ki korre kama obotte ocakke lye nio ka ma ogik iye 	trace very carefully where its footprint
dogge rep ka lok  	he is very talkative
Ada awaco botwu ni, yalwak man pe bitum, nio waŋ ma lok magi ducu otimme. 	Truly I tell you, this generation will certainly not pass away until all these things have happened.
oywelo yatte yom pe ber apaya me jami ot 	the wood of oywelo is soft and not good for making them into furniture for houses
ryam dyel ci igon wiigi odok tung lacuc 	chase the goats and drive them towards the right direction
gwerro tyen ki tol ma onongo gitweyo iye matek 	making a furrow or deep impression with a string which was tied tightly on the leg
laa gee ber mada me akwoya me war arukka 	the skin of alligator is very good for making shoes
litino gitye ka curre i pii  	the children are diving into water
meja mape gitiyo ki bao ma keg orii mada, ka giwekko i ceng pi kare malac, ci gangge woko 	a table made with unseasoned wood, if left in the sun for a long time splits 
yikke i tee lum	to hide under the grass
litino gitye ka ckidu dek ma i atabu 	the children are cleaning (with their fingers) the food which is left in the bowel
Yecu ogamo ni, “En aye ŋat ma abigweyo dek, amiyo bote.” Ka doŋ ogweyo dek, ci omiyo bot Juda wod pa Cimon me Keriot. 	Leaning back against Jesus, he asked him, “Lord, who is it?”
mitto yenynyo kolo mada kom dano 	he likes very much to find trouble with a person 
kun oyero me neno can kacel ki jo pa Lubaŋa ma ka bedo ki yomcwiny me bal ma ri pi kare manok mo keken-ni. 	He chose to be mistreated along with the people of God rather than to enjoy the fleeting pleasures of sin.
anyira gujwaar kany mape wacce  	the girls have grown up here very tall
Ociko lucat amam ni, “Teru jami magi woko, pe wulok ot pa Abana odok cuk.” 	So he made a whip out of cords, and drove all from the temple courts, both sheep and cattle; he scattered the coins of the money changers and overturned their tables.
kit rac pa latinni twerro jukke	the behaviour of your child can be stopped 
litino toto wang gi ka neno dano matye kalega 	the children strain their eyes to see the people who are praying
imitto gik kwene? 	where do you want to stop? 
cut cam i muny 	take the food and swallow
wudokka iye. 	Tell me:
Wan pe myero wadonyu i timo tim kwele, macalo jo mogo i kingi yam gutimo, ci jo alip pyeraryo wiye adek guto woko ducu i nino acel. 	We should not commit sexual immorality, as some of them did—and in one day twenty-three thousand of them died.
wucaŋ lutwo ma tye iye, wutit botgi ni, ‘Ker pa Lubaŋa doŋ onyiko cok botwu.’ 	Heal the sick who are there and tell them, ‘The kingdom of God has come near to you.’
temme ki kwoo ni ducu me wot ci tyenni ma okwee ni tekke dwoggo cen 	try with all your might to walk and the loss of power in your legs will return
ento ka ce wupoko kin dano, noŋo wutimo rac, noŋo cik ŋolo kop i komwu ni wun lubalo. 	But if you show favoritism, you sin and are convicted by the law as lawbreakers.
Wucul gin ma myero bot ŋat acel acel, wucul mucoro bot wegi mucoro, ki ajog bot wegi ajog, wulwor jo ma myero me alwora, wuwor jo ma myero me awora. 	This is also why you pay taxes, for the authorities are God’s servants, who give their full time to governing.
wanggo buk dold ocakke nigning? 	how did burning of the books start? 
kape giteggo yat i kom gweni kare ki kare ci gikuny makkongi woko 	if the chicken are not dusted from time to time with medicine, they become infected with the fowl fleas
anyira me nine man pe gingeyo cacco nyim 	the present girls do not know how to grind the sesame  
gitye ka ngotte	they are having sexual intercourse
ocoone waraga ci pe odok iye maber 	he wrote a letter to him but he did not reply well
Pien mucara me bal en to, ento mot ma Lubaŋa miyowa nono, en aye kwo ma pe tum i Yecu Kricito Rwotwa.	What benefit did you reap at that time from the things you are now ashamed of? Those things result in death!
Wucam kit riŋo ducu ma gicato i cuk, pe wubed ka penyo gin mo iye pi lworo bal. 	Eat anything sold in the meat market without raising questions of conscience,
Otito botgi lok i carolok mapol calo meno, kit ma gitwero niaŋ kwede. 	With many similar parables Jesus spoke the word to them, as much as they could understand.
en aye kwidi ma tucu del kom ci donyo yikke iteere kuno, ma dako ne iye donggo kuno dokko madit ma nogo opong tong  	jigger is a flea which burrows under the skin and develops there, the female ones, the abdomen becomes greatly distended with eggs
Ento meno wek muŋe ni Wod pa dano tye ki twero me weko bal i wi lobo” ci ociko lagoro ni, “Awacci ni, A, ikwany kitarani, idok paco.” 	Which is easier: to say, ‘Your sins are forgiven,’ or to say, ‘Get up and walk’?
Waŋeyo ni Lubaŋa yam oloko ki Moses, ento dano man pe waŋeyo ka ma oa iye.” 	Then they hurled insults at him and said, “You are this fellow’s disciple! We are disciples of Moses!
owotto mairo acel 	he walked for one mile 
kun giwaco ni, ‘Dano man ocako gedo, ento tyekone oloye woko.’ 	saying, ‘This person began to build and wasn’t able to finish.’
odec nen i kom litino twatwal nikatto i kom ludito 	the abdominal swellings which are due to malaria are common among the children
jwang lokke woko 	confuse the case! spoil the case
twacce piny ni but nia ki i wii yat 	fell down heavily from the tree 
Pien Kricito ma lugoba, kacel ki lunebi-gu ma lugoba gibibino, gibinyuto lanyut ki tyo jami me taŋo, wek girweny jo mapol ka gitwero, wek girweny wa ki jo ma Lubaŋa oyero bene. 	For false messiahs and false prophets will appear and perform great signs and wonders to deceive, if possible, even the elect.
iye gung i kom lok meeri 	he is suspicious of your words 
Kadi bed atidi twatwal ki i kin jo pa Lubaŋa ducu, ento en omiya mot man me kica me tito lok me kwena maber bot Lurok i kom lonyo madwoŋ pa Kricito ma tere pe tatte, 	I became a servant of this gospel by the gift of God’s grace given me through the working of his power.
odwoggecen  	he returned to him
amitto cogo keken pi gwok 	I want only bones for the dogs 
pirra nino ducu kello pekko ki lapiira 	conspiring always brings trouble on the conspirator
bed wunu piny wek atii pii me Iwokko cingwu 	sit down now so that I may pour water for washing your hands
beddo ki tam pe rac 	to have an idea is not bad
ngadi dong ogol woko ki i badde 	so and so is crippled in the arm
I nino meno acel-li Yecu oa woko ki i ot, ci ocito obedo i dog nam. 	That same day Jesus went out of the house and sat by the lake.
Abinoŋo kit bakacic aŋo? Bakacicca en aye yomcwiny ma anoŋo i tito lok me kwena maber, laboŋo ŋolo kit cul mo iye bot dano ma giwinyo, kun bene pe atiyo ki twero ma atye kwede wek anoŋ kony mo ki bot jo ma atito botgi lok me kwena maber. 	What then is my reward? Just this: that in preaching the gospel I may offer it free of charge, and so not make full use of my rights as a preacher of the gospel.
owacce ni, “Abimiyi twer man ducu ki deyo man ducu, pien gityeko miyo bota, atwero miyo bot ŋat ma an amito. 	And he said to him, “I will give you all their authority and splendor; it has been given to me, and I can give it to anyone I want to.
latinni tye ka pongge mere nono ni pe emitto cam kun kono mitto 	this child is pretending that he does not want to eat and yet he wants
Yibgi onoŋo tye obedo calo lwak oton, kwirgi bene tye me kayo dano, ki twerogi me uno dano pi dwe abic onoŋo bene yam tye i yibgi. 	They had tails with stingers, like scorpions, and in their tails they had power to torment people for five months.
dok ka ce ŋat mo mito pido kwedi ni wek eter kotini, ci miye kanyini bene. 	And if anyone wants to sue you and take your shirt, hand over your coat as well.
mon ducu gubinno ma gurukko agak caga i gutgi	all the women came dressed with the cut ostrich egg necklaces
cukari ma en matto twerro jwikke 	the amount of the sugar that he takes can be reduced 
Ka gin manok macalo man timone loyowu, piŋo wubedo ki tam mapol pi lok mukene? 	Since you cannot do this very little thing, why do you worry about the rest?
Opwonyogi ki lok mapol i carolok. I pwonnye owaco ni, 	He taught them many things by parables, and in his teaching said:
Pien i kare ma jo mogo ma gua ki bot Yakobo peya gubino, onoŋo Kepa nywako cam kacel ki Lurok	When Cephas came to Antioch, I opposed him to his face, because he stood condemned.
par mada pi lok ma gitito i kanica 	ponder and meditate seriously about what was preached in the church today 
Jo abic i kingi onoŋo lumiŋ, ki jo abic onoŋo luryeko. 	Five of them were foolish and five were wise.
oa ka lokko lokke woko 	he came from changing his statement 
obwol orukko 	the mushrooms have germinated 
i nino meno, i kare ma en bidwogo kun jone miyo deyo bote, ma noŋo giure i kin jo ducu muye en	on the day he comes to be glorified in his holy people and to be marveled at among all those who have believed
ruddo kom agulu nio ka ryeny mada	polishing the pot until it is very bright or polishes the pot until it is very bright 
Ocako tito botgi ni, “Tin ginacoya man ocobo kakare kun wuwinyo ki itwu.” 	He began by saying to them, “Today this scripture is fulfilled in your hearing.”
Koni waŋeyo ni, in iŋeyo gin ducu, dok penyi pe dok mitte	Then Jesus’ disciples said, “Now you are speaking clearly and without figures of speech.
gang leng ma mac tye ka lyel iye ni tayi 	the home is very bright with the light shining all over
in doki lagoba twatwal 	you are a great liar
Rwot oketo ciŋe i komgi, ci lwak jo mapol gulokke bote. 	The Lord’s hand was with them, and a great number of people believed and turned to the Lord.
lanen tye kwene ma nyutto ni ogoyi mada? 	where is the sign or mark, which shows that you have been badly beaten?
Ento Yecu odok iye botgi ni, “Wun wumi botgi cam.” Gugamo ni, “Watye ki mugati abic ki rec aryo keken, nyo ka ce imito waciwil cam pi lwak man ducu.” 	He replied, “You give them something to eat.” They answered, “We have only five loaves of bread and two fish—unless we go and buy food for all this crowd.”
lokke cwiiyo cwinynye mada 	he is very much annoyed about the matter
en pe tye ki mwoc mo ma mere 	he has no words ot his own, which he can say when shouting for joy 
Wod pa dano dok obino kun camo dok mato bene, wun wuwaco ni, ‘Nen, dano ma owor ki lameno, larem lujogmucoro ki lubalo.’ 	The Son of Man came eating and drinking, and you say, ‘Here is a glutton and a drunkard, a friend of tax collectors and sinners.’
gen lutic ma gityo botti ci gin bene gibitiyo maber 	trust your workers and they too will work well 
Pe wuwek dano gulok i kom gin maber ki tuŋ botwu ni obedo gin marac. 	But if anyone regards something as unclean, then for that person it is unclean.
Wumot utmego ma tye i Laodikia, dok wumot Nimpa bene kacel ki jo muye Kricito ma gicokke i ode. 	Our dear friend Luke, the doctor, and Demas send greetings.
pe ibed ka lemmo jami atata ki lebbi pien ceng mo gwok ibinog ma wanggo lebbi 	do not always lick things because one day you might find a thing that will burn your tongue
abillo dekke mit mada	I tasted the food, it is very nice
jwaa waar meerri maleng	polish your shoes very clean
poc i lok macon ma kit meno pe dong twerre 	remembering old matters like that is now impossible
i nyiŋ Yecu Kricito Lanajaret, woti.” 	In the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, walk.”
latin opyello cet ni nyany i dye ot 	the child has passed a large quality of faeces on the floor of the house
onoŋo en mito ribo kingi, ci owaco botgi ni, ‘Wun omego, piŋo wutimme marac kekenwu?’ 	He tried to reconcile them by saying, ‘Men, you are brothers; why do you want to hurt each other?’
dano gitye ka jimmo i nyim ot lukiko 	people are assembling before the court 
oloyo jwitjwit kono gicello woko 	he narrowly escaped from being shot
wangge ongollo 	he has sunken eyes 
wacitu ka ngonno Orac pi goba ne 	let us go to beat Orac and tell him off for his lies 
Ceŋ bicido woko macol, dwe bidoko makwar calo remo, ma noŋo nino pa Rwot peya obino, nino madit ki me deyo madwoŋ. 	The sun will be turned to darkness and the moon to blood before the coming of the great and glorious day of the Lord.
lalele me kot ma ocweer madowong twatwal li oturo pem ci omollo woko 	the flood from the heavy rain that took place, broke the bridge and washed swept it away
Olwoŋo ŋat acel i kin lutic, openye ni, ‘Man kono gin aŋo ma tye ka timme-ni?’ 	So he called one of the servants and asked him what was going on.
cukari otum woko ni pill, man tin dong wamatto cal nono labongo cukari 	the sugar is completely finished and today we shall take tea without sugar
raa tum ki oboko	the whole grass torch is finished up for oboko
opego tanynyo piny 	the pigs do lift the ground all over 
mitti madowong twatwal me cam biteerri oyot oyot mada i ngom 	too much desire for eating, will take you very quickly into the ground 
‘Rwot owaco bot Rwoda ni, Bed i kom bada ma lacuc, i kabedo me deyo, nio ka abiketo lukworri piny i te tyeni.’ 	He said to them, “How is it then that David, speaking by the Spirit, calls him ‘Lord’? For he says,
it bendera malo 	raise up the flag
ryal en aye gitiyo kwedde me cupiria, binika, malaga ki mukene 	aluminium is the metal which is used as sauce pans, tea pot, spoons and so on
cit cen 	go away
en aye kong okwong billo kace kado lye i dekke 	he should be the first to taste whether there is salt in the sauce
gigolle ni ocul dyel abic ci man okoko apil i kot ma malo 	he was fined five goats but he appealed against it to the high court
Ka oweko lwak woko, ci odonyo i ot, lupwonnyene gucako penye pi carolok meno ma obolo-ni. 	After he had left the crowd and entered the house, his disciples asked him about this parable.
man mony me too pe me tukko tuko 	this is a very serious war, war to death 
obeddo macalo burogi gikutto akutta ci ento tye ki gin ma gidiyo ki i butte adek ma lokko dwanne ka gikutto 	it is just like bugle but it has three knobs at the side which is pressed when it is being blown to change the voice
labolone pud cot pien peya ocek 	the banana still tastes bad because it is not yet ripe 
pien Won kikome marowu, pien wun wumara, dok wuye ni an aa bot Won. 	Ask and you will receive, and your joy will be complete.
lewic miyo icamo awola	if you are shy, you eat poison
tyenne twerro turre woko 	his legs can be broken
Ka cabit doŋ okato, i kine okogweno me nino mukwoŋo me cabit, Maliam Lamagdala ki Maliam mukene gucito ka neno lyel. 	After Jesus had sent the crowd away, he got into the boat and went to the vicinity of Magadan.
ot man dong oballe mada, lalakko dong biyubbone	this house is now dilapidated, the heir will repair it
“Gitye ki gum lukica, pien gin bene gibitimo kica botgi. 	Blessed are the merciful, for they will be shown mercy.
cet pa Latin ma okonynye i dye ot twerro geye 	the stool which the child has passed on the floor can be cleaned 
Man obedo coc mukwoŋo ma gicoyo, i kare ma Kurenio loyo lobo Ciria. 	In those days Caesar Augustus issued a decree that a census should be taken of the entire Roman world.(This was the first census that took place while Quirinius was governor of Syria.)
Ento Maliam cwinye opoto pi lok man, obedo ka tamo te lok me mot man. 	Mary was greatly troubled at his words and wondered what kind of greeting this might be.
I nino meno jo mapol biwaco bota ni, ‘Rwot, Rwot, yam pe watito lok pa Lubaŋa i nyiŋi, dok pe waryemo cen maraco-gu woko ducu i nyiŋi? Yam pe watiyo tic mogo matek madito i nyiŋi?’ 	“Not everyone who says to me, ‘Lord, Lord,’ will enter the kingdom of heaven, but only the one who does the will of my Father who is in heaven.
yeng olang 	ring the bell
bin woko kany 	come outside here
tang gwiny ma donggo pe ber ki pali mading 	very big buttocks are not good in a tight pair of trousers
Pi niyena i kom Lubaŋa atye ki gen ni dano gibecer woko, jo ma kitgi atir wa ki jo ma kitgi pe atir, ci gin bene gitye ki kit gen acel-lu. 	and I have the same hope in God as these men themselves have, that there will be a resurrection of both the righteous and the wicked.
Ka guwinyo lok man, ci gutugge ki akeca ma gimito nekogi. 	When they heard this, they were furious and wanted to put them to death.
baro yen ni ryak 	splitting the log with a cracking sound
Utmega, wan wacal ki Icaka, wan litino me cikke pa Lubaŋa. 	For it is written: “Be glad, barren woman, you who never bore a child; shout for joy and cry aloud, you who were never in labor; because more are the children of the desolate woman than of her who has a husband.”
Pe wulwor jo ma neko kom, ento pe gitwero neko tipo	Do not be afraid of those who kill the body but cannot kill the soul
raddo jami ata i dyee ot 	throwing things all over the floor
nekko mac	extinguish the fire
ka cam mewa 	the place where we eat or our eating place
bur abuno gikwinynyo me cokko lalelee ma mol citto woko	the deep round hole has been dug to collect the rivulets of water which flows away 
obino bota, ci ocuŋ ka ŋeta, owacca ni, ‘Ominwa Caulo, wek waŋi doŋ oyabbe!’ Ci waŋa oyabbe woko i cawa meno cut, ka aneno kome. 	He stood beside me and said, ‘Brother Saul, receive your sight!’ And at that very moment I was able to see him.
tyenni twerro roone i waarre 	your foot can be pushed into the shoe 
cik wino me makko winyo  	lay down the trap of loops of hair for catching the birds
muk but mungati wek i cam 	break off a piece of the bread and eat
caak ma i tuno keken pe rommo latin 	breast milk alone is not enough for the child 
odii pul girubbo ki pii ci gipiyo dokko olel pul ma en aye dong dek ma gicammo 	groundnut paste is mixed with water and stirred with pestle to form a sauce which is then eaten
kit timme meeri atata twerro ngommo wii litino woko	your type of behaviour can easily divert the children
larok acel acel ducu matye kany myerro obin ka coyo nyingge i buk ka wek gingee kama en beddo iye 	every foreigner who is here, must come for registration so that the place where he stays is known
jut pa Akot ki oluta kwon i kom nyaare obeddo rac mada  	Akot's beating of her daughter with a stick for stirring kwon was cruel 
Ento Yecu olokke botgi owaco ni, “Anyira Jerucalem, pe wukok pira, ento wukok piwu kenwu ki pi litinowu. 	Jesus turned and said to them, “Daughters of Jerusalem, do not weep for me; weep for yourselves and for your children.
bed mot pe iyegge 	do not be shaken 
Pien twero pa lwak aguragura meno tye i doggi ki i yibgi. Yibgi obedo calo twol mapol ma tye ki wigi, en yibgi-nu aye giketo kwede arem i kom dano. 	The power of the horses was in their mouths and in their tails; for their tails were like snakes, having heads with which they inflict injury.
Yecu openyo jone apar wiye aryo ni, “Wun bene wumito ket woto?” 	From this time many of his disciples turned back and no longer followed him.
Ka ce ŋat mo pe bijolowu nyo pe biwinyo lokwu, ci wuteŋ apwa woko ki i tyenwu i kare ma noŋo wua wuweko ot nyo gaŋ meno. 	If anyone will not welcome you or listen to your words, leave that home or town and shake the dust off your feet.
omiinigi pwoc madit pi kony ma gumiine 	he thanked them very much for helping him
kama dano mutoo ducu giyikko iye 	where the bodies of the dead people are buried 
Yecu odonyo i Jeriko kun oekato akata. 	Jesus entered Jericho and was passing through.
pe wunywak cam kacel ki kodi dano-nu. 	Do not even eat with such people.
latin man dok labelu twatwal	this child is an imbecile
lyec neko won poto ikom poto ne	the elephant kills the owner of the field it is raiding
jul ajulla genggo dano woko ka binno ka limmi 	moodiness prevents people from visiting you
Pire omiyo Lubaŋa opwoyo jo macon. 	This is what the ancients were commended for.
I kom nino mukwoŋo me cabit mon gupuk odiko con ma ceŋ otuc, ci gucito i wi lyel. 	Very early on the first day of the week, just after sunrise, they were on their way to the tomb
pien kadi bed onoŋo yam giŋeyo Lubaŋa, ento pe guwore macalo Lubaŋa, pe bene gupwoye, ento tamgi odwokogi i gin ma pe konyo, ki tam ma i cwinygi me miŋomiŋo bene doŋ ocido woko odoko col. 	since what may be known about God is plain to them, because God has made it plain to them.
nen oniang i wanggi 	look at it properly and observe it carefully
gubinno gutore woko li nyany i bar odilo 	they came and assembled in large numbers in the football field
pe ber me coyo daa ma laworo 	it is not good to revive the quarrel of yesterday 
abagabaga dongo katto nyig muranga woko	the beans of abagabaga are much bigger than those of ordinary 
Doŋ ka dano ma guye Kricito gucokke kacel kun jo ducu ma iye gidumo leb mapatpat, dok ka jo mukene ata, nyo ma pe guye, gubino iye, pe gibiwaco ni wun jo mubaŋŋe? 	So if the whole church comes together and everyone speaks in tongues, and inquirers or unbelievers come in, will they not say that you are out of your mind?
lokko lok me gakko dano 	he talks stuff that will mislead the people
Aŋa ma bipokowa ki i kom mar pa Kricito? Neno can, nyo kumo, nyo ayelayela, nyo kec, nyo bedo munero, nyo gin marac, nyo pala lucwan? 	Who will bring any charge against those whom God has chosen? It is God who justifies.
awobini dong tye ki mecce 	the boy now has secret girl friend 
loc i tukko pe dong nyutte ni wun pe wungeyo tukko 	defeat in the sport, does not mean that you do not know how to play 
Pien jo ducu ma Cwiny pa Lubaŋa telogi, gin aye litino pa Lubaŋa. 	Therefore, brothers and sisters, we have an obligation—but it is not to the flesh, to live according to it.
moko me aguurra nyuka 	flour for making porridge
lakwoo ononggo ocitto ka kwoo ci ogeng woko pien ononggo dano tye 	a thief went to steal, when he found the people there, he suddenly stopped 
pwon it yat man i teer me yat 	pluck a leaf from this tree and take it for medicine
um twerro beddo ma okongne nyo ma obab 	the nose can be flat 
Ka ce waŋi aye omiyo ipoto i bal, ci kol woko	And if your eye causes you to stumble, pluck it out
gitweyo pi wol 	he was jailed for poisoning
calle obeddo mara mara 	the picture looks blurred or indistinct
dano ma lacaro pe ngeyo cam ki Malaga 	a villager does not know how to eat with spoons 
iwek bedo ma pe iye, ento ma ye.” 	Reach out your hand and put it into my side
tye i dero 	it is in the barn
Wumot bene Pilologo ki Julia, Nerea gin ki laminne, ki Olimpa, ki jo pa Lubaŋa ducu ma gitye kacel kwedgi. 	Greet Asyncritus, Phlegon, Hermes, Patrobas, Hermas and the other brothers and sisters with them.
ka dong iwekko boma cikwny yoo tung lacam ma lac ma ocitto ni pok en aye ilubbi 	after you have left the town, take the road on your left hand which is wide and broad, and follow it
twol bollo gutte ni Iwany Iwany nyo wiye ni Iwany lwany ka mitto too 	the snake tosses its head side to side when it is dying
Doŋ onoŋo wucito kunnu ka neno gin aŋo? Wucito ka neno lanebi mo? Iyo, awaco botwu ni ŋat madit makato lanebi. 	But what did you go out to see? A prophet? Yes, I tell you, and more than a prophet.
ka omeru obalo, juke, ka oŋut, ci timme kica. 	“If your brother or sister sins against you, rebuke them; and if they repent, forgive them.
cwinynye tye ka cweer pien pe engeyo kit ma laminne tye kwedde ki twoone 	she is very much worrying because she does not know how her sister is with her illness
pe ilok lok tino kany 	do not speak in a childish manner here 
mat yatte doki odocco  	take the medicine again
Pien yam gicoyo ni, “Abityeko ryeko pa jo maryek, abibalo niaŋ pa jo ma ŋeyo piny woko.” 	For it is written: “I will destroy the wisdom of the wise; the intelligence of the intelligent I will frustrate.”
lakwaara tye kwene? 	where is my grandchild? 
kare mukene lek nyutto gin ma mitto timme	sometimes dream reveals what is to happen
winy maber wer ma latin acel acel werro wek igol agaa ma loyo i wer meno 	listen very carefully and judge as to who is the winner of the singing competition
nyek maa pe maarra	my stepmother does not like me
pe amitto lok me tal, 	I do not want anything to do with charming or casting spell
kono wagero aduc adek, acel meri, acel pa Moses, ki acel pa Elia”. Onoŋo Petero pe ŋeyo gin ma myero eloki. 	Let us put up three shelters—one for you, one for Moses and one for Elijah.” (He did not know what he was saying.)
Lujudaya guuro, kun giwaco ni, “Dano man oŋeyo nukuta niŋniŋ, kun kono pe okwano?” 	Not until halfway through the festival did Jesus go up to the temple courts and begin to teach.
Lwak onoŋo gubedo ka kuro Jekaria, guuro rune twatwal i ot pa Lubaŋa. 	Meanwhile, the people were waiting for Zechariah and wondering why he stayed so long in the temple.
yab yoo me tic ki dano 	open the way for the people for work or job 
En okonywu, wek kwowu obed ma myero bot Rwot, ma yomo cwinye maber, kun wutiyo tic mabeco ma miyo kwowu nyak nyig madwoŋ, dok wumedde bene ka ŋeyo Lubaŋa. 	and who also told us of your love in the Spirit.
Ento pe wiwu owil, lurema, i lok acel-li, ni, ki bot Rwot nino acel rom ki mwaka alip acel, mwaka alip bene rom ki nino acel. 	But do not forget this one thing, dear friends: With the Lord a day is like a thousand years, and a thousand years are like a day.
Langi pe gipurro ki kweri lagot	Ocen has already made a circle of reeds for the house that he wants to build
kama dano dwog iye twatwal yot mada me gwenynyo yoo labongo rwatte ki lawotti 	where there are many people it is very easy to pass in opposite direction without meeting with your companion 
ryeyo tyenne mot 	stretching out her legs comfortably 
ŋat ma luba pe biwoto i piny macol, ento bibedo ki ceŋ me kwo.” 	When Jesus spoke again to the people, he said, “I am the light of the world
wurwak agit i lwet ciŋe, ki war i tyene. 	Put a ring on his finger and sandals on his feet.
“En oneko waŋgi, omiyo cwinygi odoko nwaŋ, wek pe gunen ki waŋgi, pe bene guniaŋ ki cwinygi, wek omi pe gulokke gudwog bota acaŋgi.” 	For this reason they could not believe, because, as Isaiah says elsewhere:
Obedo ka laro lok ki Lujudaya ki jo ma giworo Lubaŋa i kacokkegi, ki i cuk bene ki jo ma en rwatte kwedgi jwijwi. 	So he reasoned in the synagogue with both Jews and God-fearing Greeks, as well as in the marketplace day by day with those who happened to be there.
en ŋat ma yam gineko pi balwa, ci Lubaŋa ocere woko wek gikwanwa ni kitwa atir.	but also for us, to whom God will credit righteousness—for us who believe in him who raised Jesus our Lord from the dead.
I nino me aborone gubino ka liro latin. Gumito cako nyiŋe ki nyiŋ wonne Jekaria, 	On the eighth day they came to circumcise the child, and they were going to name him after his father Zechariah,
buk ot oyoo ki yito wek okatti woko 	blow smoke into the rat's hole to make it come out
yamo oollo wii dere woko 	the wind blew off the root of the barn
kicaa pa ladit pe dong nono	an elder's handbag is never completely empty
cat dyel wek limme icul ki banyani 	sell the goat so that you may pay your debt
wangge gic  	he is still young, inexperienced, dull, sluggish
lut tyenni i war 	push your foot into the shoe
Ka ce wuŋeyo ni en kite atir, ci myero wuniaŋ ada ni, ŋat acel acel ma tiyo gin ma tye atir noŋo Lubaŋa munywalo.	If you know that he is righteous, you know that everyone who does what is right has been born of him.
ber ber pa lalaa	she is as beautiful as the lalaa
werro lum 	stirring or rustling the grass
tukko odilone tye nigning?	how is the football match going on? 
wen Iwobbe alwobba ka gitye ka lak i ngom 	the white ants follow one another when crawling on the ground
cittu wucigwet ot aditi ne woko	go and remove the bird's aditi's nest 
guwacci, “Dano-ni owaco ni, ‘Atwero keto ot pa Lubaŋa, ka dok agero woko kakare i nino adek.’ ” 	and declared, “This fellow said, ‘I am able to destroy the temple of God and rebuild it in three days.’”
kom aweno obeddo aciri aciri	the guinea fowl's feathers are spotted black and white
ki ngoo 	peep through the window and see what is happening outside
dano ma time kit eno twerro Jerre 	a person who behaves like that, can be humiliated or ashamed
Doŋ atamo ni, pi can ma odiyowa marac, bedo ber ka dano moni obedo kit macalo tye kwede. 	Because of the present crisis, I think that it is good for a man to remain as he is.
tye ka medde amedda ki kwoone	increasing in stealing
awaro tyen en aye miyo winyo wotto nyo kwang maber i pii	it is the webbed toes that make the bird walk or swim easily on water
mac taarane taar twatwal carro wang dano 	the lamp is too bright, it dazzle the eyes 
gwokke pe itwoor wii ki bao doggola matye lapiny 	be careful not knock your head against the low door frame 
I kare ma en tye ka lok i kom kit ma atir ki gwokke kekene, ki ŋolo kop ma bibedo i kare me anyim, lworo omako Pelici omiyo owacci, “Koŋ doŋ iciti	As Paul talked about righteousness, self-control and the judgment to come, Felix was afraid and said, “That’s enough for now! You may leave
Ento pe doŋ agal wii, abako doga boti pi kicani iwiny lokwa macegocego-ni. 	But in order not to weary you further, I would request that you be kind enough to hear us briefly.
kok ma tanggo cingge atagga pi can madit ma opotto i komme pi too pa lutunggi liweng 	cries and extends and supinates his hands for pity for the terrible catastrophe that has befallen her for the loss of all her kids and kin
Ki me aryone en ene ni, ‘Mar lawoti macalo imarre keni.’ Pe dok tye kit cik mo ma pire tek makato cik magi aryo-ni.” 	The second is this: ‘Love your neighbor as yourself.’ There is no commandment greater than these.”
An doŋ aniaŋ i lok man, omiyo aŋeyo ni pud abibedo, dok abiri botwu ducu wek wumedde wuwot anyim, wubed ki yomcwiny i niyewu. 	but it is more necessary for you that I remain in the body.
curru lok atyer	to speak frankly
Ento lamalaika pa Rwot owaco ki Pilipo ni, “A iwot idok tuŋ acuc i yo ma a Jerucalem dok piny i Gaja.” Yo ma kunnu wok ki i tim. 	Now an angel of the Lord said to Philip, “Go south to the road—the desert road—that goes down from Jerusalem to Gaza.”
Catan ma yam obwologi-ni bene gibolo woko i nam me mac ki gweŋ calfa ma mac oliyo, ka ma lee ki lanebi ma lagoba bene gitye iye ca	And the devil, who deceived them, was thrown into the lake of burning sulfur, where the beast and the false prophet had been thrown
puk buro madwong i coron wek onek iwangi matye madowong iiye kuno 	pour a lot of ashes into the latrine so that it may kill the flies which are too many inside there 
culla lim meerra ma imakko i ceng adek 	pay me the debt of money which you borrowed from me on Wednesday
danone obeddo amuli, myero wugwokke ka wutye ka lok kwede 	be careful when talking to him, he is a traitor 
twoo dong obwoye matek mada 	he is very much overwhelmed with the disease 
cingge oding woko ki koyo 	his hands are numbed with cold
Abana, ket deyo i kom nyiŋi.” Dwan oa ki i polo ni, “Doŋ aketo deyo i kome, dok abiketo aye.” 	“Now my soul is troubled, and what shall I say? ‘Father, save me from this hour’? No, it was for this very reason I came to this hour.
man en aye obur pa Onekagi ma yang gubeddo iye i kare macon mada 	this is the old place that Oneka's family stayed a very very long time ago
jo Lamogi yang con giringo gikanne i boro 	in the past the Lamogi clan used to run and hide in the caves
Ci gucito gucoye, kun giwacce ni, “Larwa Rwot, nen wato woko do.” 	But Jesus was sleeping.
I kare ma doŋ gitye ka dok woko, Yecu ocako lok ki lwak lok i kom Jon, ni, Onoŋo wucito i tim ka neno gin aŋoŋ Onoŋo wucito ka neno lagada ma yamo obedo ka yeŋone?	As John’s disciples were leaving, Jesus began to speak to the crowd about John: “What did you go out into the wilderness to see? A reed swayed by the wind?
cikat makko gwiny apata mada 	skirts fit the flat buttocks very well 
bongone twero yarre i wii tol ci twee iye 	the cloth can be spread on the string to dry there
Pe te lokke ni wan wape ki twero, ento wamine giwa kenwa me bedo lanen ma myero wun wulubi. 	We did this, not because we do not have the right to such help, but in order to offer ourselves as a model for you to imitate.
Ma naka yam peya owinnye ni ŋat mo oyabo waŋ dano mo ma ginywale ma waŋe oto. 	The man answered, “Now that is remarkable! You don’t know where he comes from, yet he opened my eyes.
ket ka kenyo 	put it there 
Yecu openye ni, “Pien inena omiyo iye? Tye ki gum dano ma pe guneno, ma guye.” 	Thomas said to him, “My Lord and my God!”
latin twerro pyelle kany 	the child can be laid here
kwonne obeddo wenye wenye 	the kwon is not well prepared and therefore watery and sottish
gwinne me ringo nennone rac 	the way she eats meat bit by bit is stupid
Lacen dok aneno lamalaika mukene ka lor piny kun a ki i polo, ma onoŋo tye ki twero madit	After this I saw another angel coming down from heaven
Wulego, pe wunoŋo, pien wulego marac, wulego ni wunoŋ wek wuti kwede me cobo mitiwu keken. 	When you ask, you do not receive, because you ask with wrong motives, that you may spend what you get on your pleasures.
gwokke mada ka cammo dek pa dako meno, pien giwacci ni en lawol 	be careful not to eat the food of that woman, because it is said that she is a poisoner a person who poisons others
Olok adanya mada ka i lok me gweyo odilo	Olok does not know anything about football
joo ma gupore ducu gucitto i wii polo 	all holy people have gone to heaven 
pien gubedo cen pa jok ma tiyo tic mogo me aura twatwal. Gin bene giwoto bot luker me wi lobo ducu ka cokogi woko kacel pi mony i nino madit pa Lubaŋa Won Twer Ducu. 	They are demonic spirits that perform signs, and they go out to the kings of the whole world, to gather them for the battle on the great day of God Almighty.
Gugamo doge ni, “In ma ginywali i bal keken-ni bene ipwonywa?” Ci guryeme woko. 	If this man were not from God, he could do nothing.”
karakap en aye waar ma gipayo nia ki i kom yat 	wooden sandal is carved out from the wood
nyello dong bao wek orom doggola 	trimming the edge of the board so that it can fit the door
Ka atye ki mot me tito lok pa Lubaŋa macalo lanebi, ma aniaŋ i muŋ ducu, dok bene noŋo atye ki ŋec ducu, ma atye bene ki niye ducu, ma atwero bene kobo kwede godi madoŋo-gu woko ka mukene, ce pe atye ki mar, ci pe a gin mo. 	If I have the gift of prophecy and can fathom all mysteries and all knowledge, and if I have a faith that can move mountains, but do not have love, I am nothing.
lok arony arony wan pe wamitto kany 	we do not want abusive or impertinent words here
Ci lamalaika owacca ni, “Co lok man ni, Jo ma gilwoŋogi i karama pa Latin romo tye ki gum.” Dok owacca ni, “Lok magi lok pa Lubaŋa.” 	Then the angel said to me, “Write this: Blessed are those who are invited to the wedding supper of the Lamb!” And he added, “These are the true words of God.”
Ka jo mukene gitye ki twero meno i komwu, ci wan doŋ pe wakatogi kwede woko? Ento kadi bed twero meno tye botwa, pe watiyo kwede	If others have this right of support from you, shouldn’t we have it all the more? But we did not use this right
Waraga man oa ki bot Paulo gin ki Silvano ka Temceo. Bot jo muye Kricito ma gibedo i Tecalonika ma gitye i Lubaŋa Won ki Rwotwa Yecu Kricito: Kica ki kuc obed botwu. 	Paul, Silas and Timothy, To the church of the Thessalonians in God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ: Grace and peace to you.
Pi meno, ka wunoŋo tekcwiny mo pi bedo i Kricito, nyo mar mo ma miyo wudiyo cwinywu, nyo ka gimiyowu ribbe mo i Cwiny Maleŋ, nyo cwiny mo me kica weko wutimo ber bot jo mukene, 	Some Pharisees who were with him heard him say this and asked, “What? Are we blind too?”
bukke tye kwene me akwana 	where is the book to be read
lwak par tye kany mada 	there are many empty catridges here 
jol kalam bot Otto 	receive the pen from Otto 
pe dok wucak tamo ni, ‘Watye ki kwarowa Abraim.’ Koŋ wunen awaco botwu ni, Lubaŋa tye ki twero me miyo gweŋ magi olokke odok likwayo Abraim. 	Produce fruit in keeping with repentance.
Oa malo ka kwan	He stood up to read,
cim ngat ma laworo peke 	point at the one who was not here yesterday 
Cik doŋ tye ka pyem ki gicikke pa Lubaŋa? Pe kit meno gire, pien ka nene gimiyo cik ma twero miyo kwo, kono kwano dano ni kite atir obedo pi lubo cik. 	A mediator, however, implies more than one party; but God is one.
Daudi ocello wii Goliac ki lacuur ci onekko woko 	David hit the head of Goliath with a stone from the sling and killed him
okok gwen rukko ngom i yoo gi 	the soldier termites raise upwards the earth along their tracks
tamme pe ber i kom lawotte 	he does not think well of his friend, that is, he does not like his friend
gicoyo ni, “Yecu me Najaret, Kabaka pa Lujudaya.” 	Pilate had a notice prepared and fastened to the cross
gurayo lim me jollo weld 	they fund raised money for welcoming the guests
Ento jo mogo i kingi guwaco ni, “En ma ceŋ oyabo waŋ lawaŋoto pe twero geŋo dano man to?” 	Then the Jews said, “See how he loved him!”
lok pii ma tye i agulo woko 	change the water which is in the pot 
Kricito ma lugoba kacel ki lunebi-gu ma lugoba gibibino, gibinyutowu lanyut ki tiyo jami taŋo, wek girweny jo mapol ka gitwero, wek girweny wa ki jo ma giyero bene. 	For false messiahs and false prophets will appear and perform signs and wonders to deceive, if possible, even the elect.
pimmo waar ma rommo tyen 	measuring the size of the shoes that will fit the feet 
nyok dyel itto min dyel 	the he goat mounts the she goat
Ento atye ki lok man i komi, pien doŋ iweko mar ma onoŋo yam itye kwede mukwoŋo ca-ni woko. 	Yet I hold this against you: You have forsaken the love you had at first.
winyo We ka yerro pul ma gipitoni woko 	the birds are pecking up the groundnuts which were planted
moo bongo i ceng 	put the cloth in the sun 
Wan ducu yam warom ki jo meno i lubo miti ma ginywalowa kwedeni, kun wacobo miti me komwa ki gin ma watamo piwa kenwa	in which you used to live when you followed the ways of this world and of the ruler of the kingdom of the air, the spirit who is now at work in those who are disobedient.
danone kitte rac I watwal pe twerro limme 	the man's behaviour is so bad that he cannot be visited
pe gibedo luwackom keken, ento gidoko bene jo ma loko lok atata, ma giridde i gin ma pe megi, gibedo ka loko lok ma pe myero gilok wacel. 	Besides, they get into the habit of being idle and going about from house to house
cip aye otera i tim	it is the apron skirt that took me away
guri kunnu pi kare manok. 	After this he went down to Capernaum with his mother and brothers and his disciples
kom adomo dong omotto woko ki moo	the gourd bottle's body has now been permeated by the oil
lwongo aryo oroco gwok	two calls confuse a dog
I kom lumalaika, Lubaŋa oloko ni, “En loko lumalaikane doko yamo, luticce en loko doko leb mac.” 	In speaking of the angels he says, “He makes his angels spirits, and his servants flames of fire.”
gwette me dwoyo motoka kun kono peya opwonyo dwoyone  	trying to drive the car when he has not yet been taught how to
Ka gin ma balle doŋ orukke ki gin ma pe balle, dok ka gin ma to doŋ orukke ki gin ma pe to, ka doŋ miyo lok ma yam gicoyo obicobbe kakare ni, “To doŋ gimwonyo woko, giloyo woko matwal.” 	When the perishable has been clothed with the imperishable, and the mortal with immortality, then the saying that is written will come true: “Death has been swallowed up in victory.”
ali myero ki okwata	causing trouble should be left to kites
lwak lee mapol laworo gumokko i obwoo ma gicikko i nyim ma ononggo gitye ka ryamogi 	many animals were caught in the net placed before them while they were being chased 
En odonyo i Kabedo Maleŋ Makato Ducu kicel keken ma doŋ otyeko lok woko ducu, kun pe otero remo dyegi ki remo litino twoni, ento otero remone kikome, ci okokowa kwede doŋ matwal. 	He did not enter by means of the blood of goats and calves; but he entered the Most Holy Place once for all by his own blood, thus obtaining eternal redemption.
gwenni bene i kare mukene gibutto i wit anok 	sometimes the chicken also sleep on the raised floor
paliamen en aye joo ma giyerrogi i yer atyer, gibeddo iye, ka dong gilarro iye lok mamakko lobo mewa ducu 	the parliament is the place where the people who have been elected in general election sit and discuss or deliberate all matters concerning the country
notto lem dakone 	to kissing his wife's cheek 
Ci Yecu odokke iye ni, “Aebino ka caŋe.” 	“Lord,” he said, “my servant lies at home paralyzed, suffering terribly.”
wular jo mogo ma kit meno kun wuceyogi woko ki i mac. Wubed ki kica i kom jo mogo kun wulworo bene, dok wukwer bene ruk ma bal me kom tye iye. 	Be merciful to those who doubt;
litino gimaarro tuko awira wira mada, giwirre nio ka dong wiigi wirrogi 	children like very much the game of turning round and round and they do so until they are gizzy
mucuggwa man maber ci i anyim wek ibinoggo lye mucuggwa madowong mada 	look after this orange seedling very well so that in future you may get a lot of oranges from it
coc meno oromo kome ducu, lee-nu onoŋo wiye tye abiro ki tuŋe tye apar. 	There I saw a woman sitting on a scarlet beast that was covered with blasphemous names and had seven heads and ten horns.
Wuŋeyo kekenwu ni anoŋo gin ducu ma mitte pira ki pi jo ma atye kwedgi ki tic ma atiyo ki ciŋa en-ni. 	You yourselves know that these hands of mine have supplied my own needs and the needs of my companions.
onoŋo en pe mito ni ŋatti mo oŋe ni etye kunnu, ento pe twero kanne. 	He entered a house and did not want anyone to know it; yet he could not keep his presence secret.
Myero guti tic mabeco, gubed lulonyo i timo ber bot dano, i poko jami, ki i miyo mot ki yomcwiny. 	Command those who are rich in this present world not to be arrogant nor to put their hope in wealth, which is so uncertain, but to put their hope in God, who richly provides us with everything for our enjoyment.
Odiko con dano ducu gibino bote i ot pa Lubaŋa ka winyo lokke.	and all the people came early in the morning to hear him at the temple.
kel cuwaan me tokko cam iye 	bring plates onto which the food will be dished
Wun jo Galatia kara wumiŋ kuman! Aŋa murogowu, wun jo ma ceŋ ginyuto botwu atyer kit ma giguro kwede Yecu i kom yatariya macalo wuneno ki waŋwu? 	And they praised God because of me.
kit gin macallo meno ononggo myerro pe itim 	such things you should not have done 
moro tin omonynyowa ki dyewor	we were invaded last night by the soldier ants
nywan me lok man ocakke ning ning? 	how did the confusion in this case start? 
cug matek ni gig pe iwek ngati mo obwolli 	stand firm do not let anybody deceive you 
twerro bolli i pekko mo madit 	it can throw you into very big trouble
Gunoŋo ni giloro got woko ki i dog lyel, 	On the first day of the week, very early in the morning, the women took the spices they had prepared and went to the tomb.
wa aa ka kwan	we have come from reading
pwonynye yabbo wang dano, telokke ni, pimeno dano niang jami mapol ci pieno miyo gitammo me tiyo jami ma anyim pigi 	learning opens people's eyes, that is, makes them understand many things and plan to do things for themselves
en maarro Iwiny mada i tee pii 	he likes very much to sink under water 
Yecu ocuŋ ka ŋete, ojuko lyeto, ci two ocaŋ woko ki i kome	So he bent over her and rebuked the fever, and it left her
danone twol gola 	the man is an informer or a double dealer 
tye ka lyerre ni pe emitto  	he is pretending or disdaining that he does not want
ki jo ma kumo myero gubed calo jo ma pe kumo, jo ma cwinygi yom calo jo ma pe cwinygi yom, jo ma wilo jami gubed calo jo ma pe tye ki gin mo, 	those who mourn, as if they did not; those who are happy, as if they were not; those who buy something, as if it were not theirs to keep;
Wun wucit ka kwero nino madito	The world cannot hate you, but it hates me because I testify that its works are evil.
it malo wii yat  	climb up the tree
pol dong tye ka waare 	the clouds are clearing away
meja mape gitiyo ki bao ma keg orii mada, ka giwekko i ceng pi kare malac, ci gangge woko 	a table made with unseasoned wood, if left in the sun for a long time cracks 
obot tyen lee ma gukatto kanynyi twerro lubbe 	the tracks of the animals which have passed here can be followed
adunone lye ka ngoone twatwal	his heart is beating very hard 
ryeko pe pa ngat acel	wisdon, cunnigness, skills or knowledge is not for one person only
litino man kitgi raccu mada nen man gupacco kor muyembe woko 	these children have very bad behaviour, look at how they have peeled off the stem of the mango tree
tye ki yoo mapol me punno dano 	he has many tricks of conning people
Kadi bed kumeno, en Ŋat Mamalo Twal pe bedo i ot ma gitiyo ki ciŋ	“However, the Most High does not live in houses made by human hands
run litino gubin oyot oyot 	impel the children to come very quickly
pe ber me rony 	making fun is not good
jami moko lye kwene? 	where are some of the things? 
Omako ciŋe, owacce ni, “Talita kum”, te lokke ni, “Latin anyaka, awacci ni, a malo.” 	He took her by the hand and said to her, “Talitha koum!” (which means “Little girl, I say to you, get up!”).
I kare meno lwak jo muye Yecu ma tye i Antiokia onoŋo doŋ gitye ki lutit lok pa Lubaŋa ki lupwony, Barnaba, Cimeon ma gilwoŋo Niga, Lukia me Cirene, ki Manaen ma odoŋ kacel ki Kerode laloyo, ki Caulo. 	Now in the church at Antioch there were prophets and teachers: Barnabas, Simeon called Niger, Lucius of Cyrene, Manaen (who had been brought up with Herod the tetrarch) and Saul.
Ka cawa doŋ mito romo abicel, piny ocido macol i wi lobo ducu nio wa i cawa aboŋwen, 	It was now about noon, and darkness came over the whole land until three in the afternoon,
en pe opoko-yokki ma iyello twatwal kitmeno	he is not a simpleton that you should trouble her like that
Gigure kacel ki luyak mogo aryo, dano acel tuŋ lacuc ki acel tuŋ lacam.  	They crucified two rebels with him, one on his right and one on his left.
dano gutorre ni jut ka nenno odilo 	many people assembled there in large numbers to watch the football
pien miti me komgi twero miyo gikwero Kricito woko, gicako mito nyomme doki aye, 	As for younger widows, do not put them on such a list
Pi meno awacciwu ni, bal ducu ma dano timo, ki lok ducu ma giyeto kwede Lubaŋa, gibiwekone woko, ento bal me yet ma giyeto ki Cwiny Maleŋ pe gibiwekone matwal.	“Whoever is not with me is against me, and whoever does not gather with me scatters.
lu Puraga laworo gubino ki obute ma gukutto magimyello kwedde 	the Puraga people yesterday came with their horns which they blew and danced with
motoka oyokke ma ononggo wotto tye ka polo yoo  	he was knocked by the ear while he was crossing the road
kac pa topino kec twatwal 	the stings of the fierce wasp is very painful 
ka latin opyello i mukeka twerro geene 	faeces of the child passed on ths mat can be wiped and cleaned
Yecu owacce ni, “Ka amito ni en ori nio ka abidwogo, ilaro aŋo iye? In luba.” 	When Peter saw him, he asked, “Lord, what about him?”
Jo ma gibedo kun gilubo kit pa dano pe gitwero yomo cwiny Lubaŋa. 	The mind governed by the flesh is hostile to God; it does not submit to God’s law, nor can it do so.
Ka dok aneno aguragura matar, ki ŋat ma ŋweco kwede onoŋo omako atum. Gimiye lalukana, ci en ocito woko kun loyo lweny, dok bene ni wek ebed ka loyo lweny. 	I looked, and there before me was a white horse! Its rider held a bow, and he was given a crown, and he rode out as a conqueror bent on conquest.
komme dok twat mada ka butto i cukul ma gibutto iye 	his body gets very thin when he lives in boarding school 
wangge ki peterol rac mada  	burning oneself with petrol is terrible
piny tye ka yugge, nyutte ni kot dong cok ka cweer 	the cloud is gathering up, that means it is about to rain
Ci omiyo lwak guuro matek, ci gupenyo ni, “Ka kumeno, ci aŋa dok ma larre?” 	The disciples were even more amazed, and said to each other, “Who then can be saved?”
wiye baaro mada 	he has a severe headache
ogut woko i ot 	he is remaining in the house
cukari ma ikello lam mada pe rommowa ducu 	the sugar you brought is not enough for all of us
pi jamine madowong ma etye kwedde twatwal omiyo dano ducu guketto giggi woko i komme 	because of the many things that he has made, many people have grudges against him 
Gulowoŋo Barnaba ni Jeuc ki Paulo ni Ermec, pien en aye lalok makato. 	Barnabas they called Zeus, and Paul they called Hermes because he was the chief speaker.
en ka ma nyiŋ man me won ocuŋ iye i doggola pa jo me odi ducu ma tye i polo ki ma tye i lobo. 	For this reason I kneel before the Father,
yallo anyira keny 	giving presents to the bridemaids
I kare ma gutiŋo waŋgi malo, pe guneno ŋat mo ento kono Yecu keken. 	When the disciples heard this, they fell facedown to the ground, terrified.
gwet lagogoni ki tal icwal woko 	push the chameleon with a stick right out side
pud tye ki tino omiyo lokko kumeno	he has still got childish manners 
tam lokke maber 	think about it carefully 
Pien onoŋo gimito romo dano alip abic. Ociko lupwonnyene ni, “Wumi dano gubed piny i dul, i dul acel acel dano pyerabic.” 	(About five thousand men were there.) But he said to his disciples, “Have them sit down in groups of about fifty each.”
wod pa dano doŋ gimiyo woko i ciŋ lubalo. 	Look, the Son of Man is delivered into the hands of sinners.
tirro dano i tyeng	to make people stand in a straight line
Obedo ka tito lok me ker pa Lubaŋa, pwonyo bene lok kom Rwot Yecu Kricito atyer ma pe gijuko.	He proclaimed the kingdom of God and taught about the Lord Jesus Christ—with all boldness and without hindrance!
Wumot Rupo, dano ma ŋene i Rwot, gin ki minne ma alwoŋo ni maa bene. 	Greet Urbanus, our co-worker in Christ, and my dear friend Stachys.
labwoto me yobbo mutoka 	a very good motor mechanic
gwenoni welle adii? 	what is the price of this chicken? 
polic tin gugone ki lwak dano ma gujemmo 	the police today fought with many strikers
yello lu mabuc pe ber  	tormenting the prisoners is not good
wek imi kony bot lucan i muŋ	But when you give to the needy, do not let your left hand know what your right hand is doing,
wek goba, ka terri dong gitwoddo woko 	don't tell lies, all information about you have been found by enquiry
nyono mum ni puny pany ki tyenne 	walking making his big marks with his feet
litino kwan dong gugil ki daa pa ladit school	the students are used to the quarrelling of the headmaster and don't care about it
gijukkongi ki tek onongo dong guyaarro woko ka lweny 	they were about to fight when they were forcefully stopped
Gupenye ni, “Imito ni waciyub kwene?” 	“Where do you want us to prepare for it?” they asked.
pien guniaŋ ni en obolo carolok man i komgi. 	But they were afraid of the people.
lawok cammo olel, amitto mega pigge 	one who has a gap in his teeth eats only the sauce usually of simsim because he cannot eat the meat, he has no teeth to eat with
ka otum, ci kec oneke. 	He ate nothing during those days, and at the end of them he was hungry.
jol layab, abollo eno 	catch the keys, I am throwing there
Luparicayo mogo gubino bote, ci gucako omo cwinye kun gupenye ni, “Cik miyo twero ni laco oryem dakone woko?” 	Some Pharisees came and tested him by asking, “Is it lawful for a man to divorce his wife?”
“Pien bibedo rom ki dano ma cito ka wot i lobo mukene, olwoŋo luticce, ci oweko jamine i ciŋgi ni gulo. 	“Again, it will be like a man going on a journey, who called his servants and entrusted his wealth to them.
Ticgi obedo me yubo jo pa Lubaŋa i ticgi me konyo dano, dok me doŋo kom Kricito,	So Christ himself gave the apostles, the prophets, the evangelists, the pastors and teachers,
latin mape winynyo juk, ii anyim bibeddo dano marac 	a child who does not listen to being dissuaded, in future will be a bad person 
nekko donggo pa lobo 	destroying the development of the country
Jami ducu doŋ Wora otyeko miyogi woko bota	“All things have been committed to me by my Father
apoya myerro pe makko ngati ni mo pien pi pekko ma bikelli	nobody should become mad beause of the trouble that he will bring to you
macalo yam giwaco ni, “Ka wuwinyo dwane tin, pe wumi cwinywu obed nwaŋ calo jo ma yam gujemo.” 	As has just been said: “Today, if you hear his voice, do not harden your hearts as you did in the rebellion.”
Petero ogamo ni, “Kadi ka jo mukene ducu gibitenyi woko, ento an pe abitenyi ata.” 	Peter declared, “Even if all fall away, I will not.”
pien pe tye dano mo ma tiyo tic matek ki nyiŋa, ma twero waco lok mo marac i koma oyot. 	“For no one who does a miracle in my name can in the next moment say anything bad about me,
dano ma latam mada 	a person who is a great thinker 
lekko dyangi pe gin ma yot pien myerro ibed kwede pi kare ducu wek pe guket ata 	herding the cattle is not an easy thing because you must be with them all the time in order to prevent them from roaming about 
goyo cal 	to draw 
tye ka cacce ki gerro otte en kene labonggo lageddo mo ma konynye 	he is struggling with the building of his house alone without the assistance of a builder
gwogi gin aye gitwerro tworro agulu ma i ot	the the dogs are the ones which are capable of knocking down the pots in the house 
giwaco bot Labeka ni, “Latin matidi biloyo latin kayo.” 	Yet, before the twins were born or had done anything good or bad—in order that God’s purpose in election might stand:
ngomme obeddo rubu rubu 	the ground is coarsely soft like sand
dano ma genne ma kitte ber mada  	he is a trusted person with very good manners
cukari man twerro pokke ma rommo dano maber 	this sugar can be divided equally and will be enough for everybody
en nino ducu loyo i ngwec 	he always wins in running
latin tye ka dotto minne 	the child is suckling his mother
gud bongone ki cinggi ka wek iniang berre	feel the cloth with your fingers in order to appreciate it's quality
Onoŋo tye dako mo ma yam otwoyo two agobi mwaka apar wiye aryo. 	And a woman was there who had been subject to bleeding for twelve years.
Jo ma kec nekogi omiyo giyeŋ ki gin maber, oryemo lulonyo gudok cen nono. 	He has filled the hungry with good things but has sent the rich away empty.
mur pii me kawa 	boil water for cotfee 
opoorro ka odde laworo 	he made a plan for his house yesterday 
ocitto i tok ot 	he went behind the house
Wan ducu jo muteggi myero wabedu ki kit tam meno	I press on toward the goal to win the prize for which God has called me heavenward in Christ Jesus.
yub ka butto ki welo 	prepare a bed for the visitor 
ganggo lok ki dano pe ber 	talking rudely to the people is not good 
Ka Yecu owinyo, ci owacce ni, “Pud iweko lok acel	When Jesus heard this, he said to him, “You still lack one thing
Dano ma lewic make pira ki pi lokka, Wod pa dano bene lewic bimake i kome, i kare ma en bidwogo i deyone ki deyo pa Lubaŋa Won kacel ki pa lumalaika maleŋ. 	Whoever is ashamed of me and my words, the Son of Man will be ashamed of them when he comes in his glory and in the glory of the Father and of the holy angels.
ceng mo kong wabibino botti 	one day we shall come to you 
kel gin mo 	bring something 
Yecu ocako mako en ki i kin lwak otere cen i muŋ, ci oketo ciŋe i it dano meno, 	After he took him aside, away from the crowd, Jesus put his fingers into the man’s ears
tet kany myerro obed tek mada pien nyonyo nok iye 	forging here must be very difficult because there are very few metals
wek cwinygi obed tek, dok wek guribbe kacel i mar. Dok amito gubed macalo lulonyo pi lok ma odonyo matut i cwinygi, mumiyo guniaŋ maber, dok bene guŋeyo muŋ pa Lubaŋa ma en Kricito kikome, 	I want you to know how hard I am contending for you and for those at Laodicea, and for all who have not met me personally.
twoo aburo cagge oyot oyot mada 	cold in the head heals very quickly 
An gilira i nino me aboro me ditta, rokka jo Icrael ma i kaka pa Benjamin. An Laibru ma jo Ibru aye gunywala. I lok ma dok i kom cik pa Moses, an abedo Laparicayo. 	If someone else thinks they have reasons to put confidence in the flesh, I have more:
“Wucit wucuŋ i ot pa Lubaŋa, wutit bot dano lok me Kwo man ducu.” 	“Go, stand in the temple courts,” he said, “and tell the people all about this new life.”
mot Onen ka i nongge 	greet Onen if you find him 
Lujudaya gudokke iye ni, “Wan pe wawaco kakare ni, in Lacamaria, itye ki cen?” 	The reason you do not hear is that you do not belong to God.”
gee otwinyo woko ki i um latin	wipe out the mucus from the child's nose
cakko nying me doggola	naming the child soon after birth 
Ka dok awinyo dwan mo ma winnye calo lwak madit ma giwo, calo mor pa pii ma corre, dok calo mor kot ma mwoc matek. Guwacci, “Aleluya! Pien Rwot Lubaŋawa Won Twer Ducu, tye ka loc. 	Then I heard what sounded like a great multitude, like the roar of rushing waters and like loud peals of thunder, shouting: “Hallelujah! For our Lord God Almighty reigns.
agwata ber mada me tokko kwon i iye pien pe goyo kwok nia i kom lyetto me kwon, macallo can	the gourd plate is very good for keeping kwon in it because the water does not form in it as in enamel or porcelain plate, from the steam of the kwon
“Nen, doŋ acok bino, kun akelo motta me pwoc, me culo dano acel acel muporo tic ma en otiyo. 	“Look, I am coming soon! My reward is with me, and I will give to each person according to what they have done.
cwiny kikome mito loyo abita pa Catan, ento kom aye nyap.” 	The spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak.”
maar lawotti macallo in 	love your neighbour as yourself 
jeny badi 	tighten you arm muscle
ngaa ma obinno? 	who has come? 
Ci gibolo min kulu madit ca woko piny i ŋom, ma yam obedo min kulu macon-ni, ma gilwoŋo ni Ladot, ki Catan, labwol dano ma i wi lobo ducu	The great dragon was hurled down—that ancient serpent called the devil, or Satan, who leads the whole world astray
kitwu myero doŋ obed kit pa jo me ceŋ. 	For you were once darkness, but now you are light in the Lord
cwinyne tinge ni myero etim gin mo 	he has an urge that he should do something
Yecu ogamo doggi ni, “Pe gicoyo i cik mewu ni, ‘An awaco ni wun lubaŋa’? 	For which of these do you stone me?”
litino gimaarro cammo pwomo mada 	children love very much to suck passion fruits
twoo aburu ki twoo mukene ma as pi gweyo gin ma ummi pe mitto gin aye gikello odal i um 	cold in the head and smelling allergic substances which does not agree with your nose and which cause irritations to your nose are the ones that cause dry mucus and crusts in the nose 
Kit meno ŋat mukwero cik man, noŋo pe okwero dano, ento noŋo okwero Lubaŋa gire ma omiyowu Cwiny Maleŋ. 	Therefore, anyone who rejects this instruction does not reject a human being but God, the very God who gives you his Holy Spirit.
aballe woko pe dong atwerro tiyo gin mo pi mat twatwal, myerro anen ni awekko mat woko ka amitti abed maber	I have ruined myself, I cannot do anything because of excessive drinking
pig cwaa ginuddo ki nyuka miyo nyuka beddo mit mada 	the tarmarind juice is boiled with gruel and makes it very nice
bonggi man ducu dong me abolla	all these clothes are for throwing away
Pien dano mo pe ki i kinwa ma kwo pire kene, dok bene dano mo pe ma to pire kene. 	Whoever eats meat does so to the Lord, for they give thanks to God; and whoever abstains does so to the Lord and gives thanks to God.
latutte mada	hard worker  
itte operre callo it olik 	his ears are wkie like those of bats
dyee woor 	at night or mid night
camme oyee dongge mada  	the food was very tasty to him
yokko doggola  	knocking the door
amitto katto woko wek agul laa 	I want to get out so that I may spit out the spittle
Kica pa Lubaŋa obed bot jo ducu ma maro Rwotwa Yecu Kricito ki mar ma pe to.	Peace to the brothers and sisters, and love with faith from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
Guporo lok kekengi kun giwaco ni, “Ka wawacci, ‘Oa ki i polo,’ en bipenyowa ni, ‘Piŋo pe wuye en?’ 	They discussed it among themselves and said, “If we say, ‘From heaven,’ he will ask, ‘Why didn’t you believe him?’
pim maber ka wek icel 	aim well so that you may shoot
latin pa ngadi tye ka mal ni pang pang i Kampala pe tye gin ma myero otii 	so and so's child is walking about aimlessly in Kampala and has no work to do
Ka wawaco ni pe wabalo, ci wamiyo Lubaŋa doko lagoba, lokke bene noŋo pe i iwa.	If we claim we have not sinned, we make him out to be a liar and his word is not in us.
ento wun pe me lobo, ento ayerowu ki i lobo	If you belonged to the world, it would love you as its own
macalo yam kwarowu gutiyo, wun bene wutiyo kit meno. 	You are just like your ancestors: You always resist the Holy Spirit!
kwon kal agwee mit mada me cammone ki ringo ma adet	the millet kwon is very nice to eat with fresh meat
ryammo gwok woko ki i ot	to chase or to drive away the dog from the house 
dano ducu bimon kwedwu pi nyiŋa. 	Everyone will hate you because of me.
Onoŋo yam en lanebi, dok oŋeyo ni Lubaŋa yam okwoŋo kwoŋ bote ni ebiketo dano mo ma i kin likwaye ma bedo i wi komkerre. 	But he was a prophet and knew that God had promised him on oath that he would place one of his descendants on his throne.
yenggo wiye pien pe mitto 	he shakes his head in disapproval or he shakes his head because he does not like it
kel placita wek imwon ki wang ret ma i tyenne 	bring the plaster and cover the wound on his leg with it
dyang pud peya obinno omiyo dyangi gitye ka wot ata 	the herdsman has not yet come, that is why the cattle are walking all over the places
Ŋat ma camo koma, ma mato remona, tye ki kwo ma pe tum, ci an abicere woko i nino me agik. 	Jesus said to them, “Very truly I tell you, unless you eat the flesh of the Son of Man and drink his blood, you have no life in you.
Olik dok lajogge twatwal pe binno oyot 	the crocodile likes very much to hide under the small patches of grass in water 
litino nongo lunynyo bongo tek 	children find undressing or to take off their dress very difficult 
cit wunu ka ngunno tal yadi caa me gerro ot 	go to cut those poles for building the house
Man omedde otyeko mwaka aryo, mumiyo jo ma gibedo i Acia guwinyo lok pa Rwot, Lujudaya ki Lugrik ducu. 	This went on for two years, so that all the Jews and Greeks who lived in the province of Asia heard the word of the Lord.
dako tye ka gwenno cogo caa ki lakke 	the woman is scraping the bone with her teeth
jug bongone ka wek ikwoo ma rommi 	reduce the size of the cloth so that you can make it to fit you
iye ka nywanne ki tam moni i cwinynye 	is being confused with some problems I ideas in his mind
Ento jo-nu gical ki lee ma pe ryek, dok ma lubo kit ma giketogi kwede, ma ginywalogi me amaka ki me aneka	But these people blaspheme in matters they do not understand
Kombeddi doŋ ba, litinona, wubed i iye, wek ka en dok binen, wabed ki tekcwiny, ma pe lewic makowa i nyime ka odwogo. 	And now, dear children, continue in him, so that when he appears we may be confident and unashamed before him at his coming.
An aŋeyo con ni iwinya kare ducu, ento awaco lok man pi lwak ma gucuŋ ka ŋeta, wek guye ni in yam iora.” 	Then Jesus said, “Did I not tell you that if you believe, you will see the glory of God?”
ringo man twerro roone maber mada 	this meat can be well roasted or grilled
ma giwacci, “Nye, in ma imuko ot pa Lubaŋa woko, ci igero pi nino adek-ki, doŋ ilarre keni ba! Ka ce in i Wod pa Lubaŋa, lor woko piny ki i kom yatariya.” 	Those who passed by hurled insults at him, shaking their heads
nyebbe ka beddo ki joo ma piny cen mo bibolli i pekko 	familiarising yourself with low people, will one day throw you into great trouble
pee dyegi aryo magi iteergi paco 	pull along these two goats and take them home
litino gimaarro cammo oywelo mada 	the children love very much to eat oywelo
Yecu odokke iye ni, “Mar Rwot Lubaŋani ki cwinyi ducu, ki tiponi ducu, ki tammi ducu. 	“Teacher, which is the greatest commandment in the Law?”
komme pek   	she is heavy, and this means, she is pregnant
pid matek pi jamini ma giyakkoni 	plead seriously to the court for your things which were looted
pien i kare ca onoŋo en pud tye i kom Abraim ma kwarone i kare ma Melkijedek rwatte kwede ca. 	because when Melchizedek met Abraham, Levi was still in the body of his ancestor.
wot tek mada i yoo matye pony- pony 	it is very difficult to walk on the road which is uneven, full of potholes
lak palaane onyanynye woko 	the edge of the knife is blunt
Man ber, dok Lubaŋa Lalarwa bene pwoyo. 	for kings and all those in authority, that we may live peaceful and quiet lives in all godliness and holiness.
kom ducu ma i nyimmi, meno me janynye pa ludito 	all the front chairs are for the sifting of important people 
“wek ibed ma nyimi leŋ dok iri i lobo pi kare malac.” 	“Honor your father and mother”—which is the first commandment with a promise—
lwak par tye kany mada 	there are many empty catridges here 
Ajwagi madito pa Lubaŋa ki lupwony-cik gucuŋ i ŋete kun gidote ki tek. 	The chief priests and the teachers of the law were standing there, vehemently accusing him.
guwacce ni, “Lapwony, dako man gimako ka timo abor, ginoŋe iye kikome. 	but Jesus went to the Mount of Olives.
lakwat ocitto ka kwayo dyangi 	the shepherd has gone to look after the cattle 
Ŋat ma ye an, macalo ginacoya owaco, ‘Kulu me pii makwo bimol nia i iye’.” 	On the last and greatest day of the festival, Jesus stood and said in a loud voice, “Let anyone who is thirsty come to me and drink.
Biketo romi yo tuŋ ciŋe ma lacuc, ento dyegi en biketo yo tuŋ ciŋe ma lacam. 	He will put the sheep on his right and the goats on his left.
Wubineno can! Pien wurom ki lyel ma pe ginen ma dano woto i wigi kun pe giŋeyo.” 	One of the experts in the law answered him, “Teacher, when you say these things, you insult us also.”
lwak Iwangi gupong mada i wii oyoo ma otoo otop 	many flies are over crowded over the dead rotten rat 
pagi wir ot 	the chief or the main central pole supporting the root of the hut
wer myel me nino man pe konynyo gin mo, wer atata keken 	the present dancing songs are all of no use
En twero tic ki dano ki mwolo, jo ma kwiya piny ki jo muŋak, pien en kikome bene noŋo goro oketo kome woko.	He is able to deal gently with those who are ignorant and are going astray, since he himself is subject to weakness.
Ka oromo kwedwa i Acco, ci wagamo en i mel, wacito kwede wa i Mitulene. 	When he met us at Assos, we took him aboard and went on to Mitylene.
gwokke dit mada, ringo ma gibolle munynyo woko ni lwek labongo nyammone 	that dog is very big, a piece of meat thrown to it, it swallows it whole without chewing 
gibibologi woko i ruk mac, ka ma dano gibikok kun gikayo lakgi.” 	and throw them into the blazing furnace, where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.
myel lacuko cuku 	dancing with the rattles tied on the legs to make rhythmic sound when dancing
yaddi ma kany ducu gungom woko 	all the trees here are bent 
dano ma yot pe dano ma pek	he is a simple not charismatic person
Ka ce wawaco ni wape ki bal, meno noŋo wabwolle abwola kenwa, lok ada noŋo pe i iwa. 	If we claim to be without sin, we deceive ourselves and the truth is not in us.
Kit macalo ŋat acel acel tye ki motte ma gimiye, wuti kwede pi konnye kekenwu, macalo lugwok-jami mabeco, ma tiyo ki mot me kica ma Lubaŋa omiyo ma kite patpat. 	Offer hospitality to one another without grumbling.
apwoyo en aye ma gitiyo kwedde mada i Ododo pa Acoli 	in the Acholi tales the hare is portrayed as a very clever or cunning animal and also as one which likes to imitate others 
cwinynye beddi ryang ryang 	he is terror stricken or he is very frightened 
komme pwac woko ka ojwayo ki amor matek 	his skin is lacerated or bruised if he rubs it hard with a sponge 
an pe acito i nino madito, pien karena peya oromo maber.” 	You go to the festival
rokko oyoo ki i ococce wek okat woko	to push a stick into the rat's hole to make it come out
ngaa latin i wii kitanda ka dong irukki	put the child on his back on the bed and then dress her him
Pe atye ki ŋat mo mukene doki ma tye ki kit cwiny ma en tye kwede, ma twero paro piwu adada macalo en. 	I hope in the Lord Jesus to send Timothy to you soon, that I also may be cheered when I receive news about you.
Jo mogo ma i kin lwak gudaŋŋe ni pi man, ki mukene ni pi man. Ka kapten doŋ pe oniaŋ i kom lok kikome pi woo ma obedo madwoŋ, ociko ni gitere i gogo. 	Some in the crowd shouted one thing and some another, and since the commander could not get at the truth because of the uproar, he ordered that Paul be taken into the barracks.
moono lok mung pa lawotti pe ber 	exposing secrets of your friend is not good 
Doŋ ka kono yam gin ducu twero cobbe kakare pi ajwagi ma gin Lulevi, ma jo Icrael yam gunoŋo cik pa Lubaŋa kacel kwedgi-ni, piŋo gimito ni ajwaka mukene dok obin i kit pa Melkijedek, kun pe giwaco ni, i kit pa Aron? 	If perfection could have been attained through the Levitical priesthood—and indeed the law given to the people established that priesthood—why was there still need for another priest to come, one in the order of Melchizedek, not in the order of Aaron?
paliamen en aye joo ma giyerrogi i yer atyer, gibeddo iye, ka dong gilarro iye lok mamakko lobo mewa ducu 	the parliament is the place where the people who have been elected in general election sit and discuss or deliberate all matters concerning the country
Remo dyegi ki twoni, ki buru roya ma giwaŋo, ka gikiro i kom jo mubalo kwer, romo lonyogi, kun lwoko komgi bedo maleŋ. 	The blood of goats and bulls and the ashes of a heifer sprinkled on those who are ceremonially unclean sanctify them so that they are outwardly clean.
twerro lekke ka wun aryo wutye 	all these cattle can be herded if two of you are there
ocitto ka cakko bel nyo ka cakka bot luremme 	she went to beg or to ask her friends to help her with some millet because she has none
ocitto ma twal pe dong dwogo 	he went forever, he will not return
ngoo ma itye ka yenynyone? 	for what are you looking?
Ento koŋ wukwoŋ keto cwinywu i kom kerre, ki noŋo kit ma atir ma en tye kwede, ci jami magi ducu gibimedo botwu. 	So do not worry, saying, ‘What shall we eat?’ or ‘What shall we drink?’ or ‘What shall we wear?’
yeya marac twerro muny woko i biamunyi 	bad boat or canoe can sink in bad waves
pol oummo lakalatwee woko omiyo pe ginen tin 	the cloud has covered the stars, that is why they are not seen today
wek acok odong ngide ngide cam magi wek ateer ki litonona 	let me collect these remaining pieces of food for my children
ngee maber ni man atimmi kica 	you must know that I have forgiven you 
yom ic aa i ojoga	kindness, generosity, happiness, joy comes from the intestinall worms
tyer got man 	split this stone 
ka imitto nenno ladit ci gung i nyimme 	if you want to see the big man kneel before him 
Pien yatta yot, ki yecca bene pe pek.”	For my yoke is easy and my burden is light.”
Lwak onoŋo gubedo kun gurume dyere. Giwacce ni, “Nen, meni ki omegi gitye woko, giyenyi.” 	A crowd was sitting around him, and they told him, “Your mother and brothers are outside looking for you.”
Ento anyira meno ma luryeko-ni gudok iye botgi ni, ‘Nen calo moo ma watye kwede pe biromowa ki wun bene	“‘No,’ they replied, ‘there may not be enough for both us and you
Ka wubedo i an, kun lokka bedo i wun, ci wuleg gin ducu ma wumito, gibitimo piwu. 	If you do not remain in me, you are like a branch that is thrown away and withers; such branches are picked up, thrown into the fire and burned.
Lacenne dano ma turo cik binen, ci Rwot Yecu bineko woko ki alur doge, tyeke woko, i kare ma en bidwogo turu ki nen woko ka maleŋ. 	And then the lawless one will be revealed, whom the Lord Jesus will overthrow with the breath of his mouth and destroy by the splendor of his coming.
bongo ducu ma en rukko nino ducu gibecco mada 	all the clothes that she wears are always very beautiful
Utmegina, dano acel acel myero obed i nyim Lubaŋa ki kite ma ceŋ gilwoŋe kwede ca. 	Brothers and sisters, each person, as responsible to God, should remain in the situation they were in when God called them.
Otemo neke woko tyen mapol	“It has often thrown him into fire or water to kill him
tic me acekere mitto awobe ma komgi yet mada 	police work requires boys or youths who are fit and healthy
luditto en aye gimaarro cammo guru guru cogo 	the elders love eating cartilaginous meat 
ci lalwoŋ wun aryo ducu bibino, biwaco ni, ‘Wek kabedo bot dano man.’ Ibidok i kabedo mapiny ki lewic madwoŋ. 	If so, the host who invited both of you will come and say to you, ‘Give this person your seat.’ Then, humiliated, you will have to take the least important place.
wirro tyen leela	to turn the wheel of a bicycle round and round
ento ka gicoyo, ci doŋo, doko dit makato dek ducu, jaŋe jany madito, miyo winyol me polo twero gero odigi i te tipone.” 	Yet when planted, it grows and becomes the largest of all garden plants, with such big branches that the birds can perch in its shade.”
cukari twerro pikke i kicaa man 	the sugar can be filled in this bag
ka mat pekke ci kwoone bene balle woko  	if there are no drinks, he has no life
latutte mada 	enduring person
gugge piny ka wek gibyel Latin i ngeyi 	bend down so that a child may be tied on your back
ma pe oballo 	without committing a crime 
bongo me yer pe ber me arukka kany pien beddo lyet twatwal 	it is not good to wear a woollen cloth here because it becomes very hot
yeya madit mada ma tinggo dano ki jami mapol 	it is a big boat that carries people as well as many things 
Ento ka kare kikome ma giciko-ni doŋ oromo, ci Lubaŋa ocwalo Wode ma dako onywalo, kun ginywalo i te cik, 	The heir is subject to guardians and trustees until the time set by his father.
I kare ma peya obino, Jon otito lok i kom batija me ŋut bot jo Icrael ducu. 	Before the coming of Jesus, John preached repentance and baptism to all the people of Israel.
muranga twii oyot oyot mada 	the beans germinate easily and quickly
en pe ngeyo jwaano kikopo mola  	he does not know how to polish brass cups
ocitto ka tucce i ot yat 	he went to have an injection in the hospital
cir pekko ducu ma polio ikommi 	endure all the difficulties that may come upon you 
ametto twon ot moo ametta madit mada ma butto iye dong tek mada 	I build such a big house in which it is now very difficult to sleep
winyo otenne wii yat caa 	the bird is perching on a tree which is visible and by itself
Ka piny doŋ oru, ajwagi madito pa Lubaŋa ki ludoŋo pa lwak guporo lok i kom Yecu kit me neke woko. 	Therefore go and make disciples of all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit,
Aciki i nyim Lubaŋa ki Kricito Yecu ki lumalaika ma giyero, gwok cik magi ma pe i jeŋŋe i kom wat nyo larem. 	But those elders who are sinning you are to reprove before everyone, so that the others may take warning.
abaani elok wotto twatwal atata	your father roams about too much
litino dong gitye ka matte amalla ki kec 	the children are overwhelmingly suffering from hunger 
Ento Rwot owacce ni, “Citi, pien en aye gin ticca ma doŋ ayero pi tero nyiŋa i nyim Lurok ki luker ki jo Icrael. 	But the Lord said to Ananias, “Go! This man is my chosen instrument to proclaim my name to the Gentiles and their kings and to the people of Israel.
Pien ginaketa ducu gitye ka kuro nyuto litino pa Lubaŋa ki miti madwoŋ mukato kare. 	I consider that our present sufferings are not worth comparing with the glory that will be revealed in us.
tye ki botti 	it is up to you
olimmo pac me ryammo dakone 	he got permission to divorce his wife
jallo cam ki latin ocam	to leave the feud to the child to eat 
mitto otto dano wek gubin ka purro poto pambane diki, ci en binekko dyel pigi wek gucam pire 	wants to ask the people to come to cultivate his cotton field tomorrow and he is going to kill a goat for them to eat for cultivating the field
kiniga gerro junne 	anger is causing his throat to swell
Ento kit ma tye kwede-ni, Lubaŋa oketo dul mapatpat i kom, dul acel acel kit macalo en mito. 	But in fact God has placed the parts in the body, every one of them, just as he wanted them to be.
omiyo gin ducu guuro twatwal, gucako pako Lubaŋa kun giwacci, “Ma naka yam peya waneno kit gin macalo man.” 	This amazed everyone and they praised God, saying, “We have never seen anything like this!”
mon pe cammo luut 	women do not eat luut 
yab yoo me tic ki dano 	open the way for the people for work or job 
mot joo ducu ma paco 	great all the people at home 
Gin ma i ŋom maber, gin aye jo ma ka guwinyo lok, ci gimako matek ki cwiny ma genne ki maber, ginyak nyiggi kun gidiyo cwinygi. 	But the seed on good soil stands for those with a noble and good heart, who hear the word, retain it, and by persevering produce a crop.
pirra nino ducu kello pekko ki lapiira	plotting always brings trouble on the plotter 
Utmega, yam gilwoŋowu me bedo ki kuc kun wulone kenwu	As for those agitators, I wish they would go the whole way and emasculate themselves!
pi lok angoo? 	for what reason? 
Wan kono dok wabibwot niŋniŋ ka pe waketo cwinywa i larre man ma pire dit twatwal-li? Larre man Rwot aye mukwoŋo tuco pire, ka doŋ jo ma yam guwinyo ki bote, gumoko botwa lokke. 	how shall we escape if we ignore so great a salvation? This salvation, which was first announced by the Lord, was confirmed to us by those who heard him.
pien ŋat ma omote noŋo oribbe kwede i ticce marac. 	Watch out that you do not lose what we have worked for, but that you may be rewarded fully.
Ka oneno lwak ci kica omake i komgi mada, pien onoŋo gitye ka unogi matek, doŋ gudoko goro, calo romi ma lakwatgi pe. 	Jesus went through all the towns and villages, teaching in their synagogues, proclaiming the good news of the kingdom and healing every disease and sickness.
ot pa jango lam mada 	the sub chief's authority is very poor
Lirre konyo ka ce ilubo cik, ento ka ituro cik, dwoki cen ibedo calo pe onoŋo giliri. 	As it is written: “God’s name is blasphemed among the Gentiles because of you.”
lacoone laper lok mada  	the man talks too much
banya cwir poto ki banya oro	wet season debt is settled by dry season debt
dako ma kitte rac ma wallo bongo woko ma inyimme ki litino awobbe 	she is a loose bad woman who takes off the front part of her dress in front of the boys
Lapwony-cik mo oa obino bote owacce ni, “Lapwony, abilubi ka ma icito iye ducu.” 	When Jesus saw the crowd around him, he gave orders to cross to the other side of the lake.
lwak yadi ature ma tye kany twerro nake ci giteerro gipito ka mukene 	all these flowering plants can be removed and transplanted elsewhere
ma odoko ajwaka, pe pi cik mo ma lubo kaka, ento pi tek me kwone ma gin mo pe romo tyeko. 	one who has become a priest not on the basis of a regulation as to his ancestry but on the basis of the power of an indestructible life.
wii meja 	top of the table 
macalo yam lanebi owaco ni, 	As the prophet says:
dako ni caa tye ka gweyo cam ma gimiyo ki wello ma odongge teerro ki litinone 	that woman is taking part of the remaining food given to guests to her children
goc ma tyerro olar wic myero dong obed goc matek mada 	the blow that can crack the skull must have been a very strong one 
Ento Lubaŋa owacce ni, ‘In lamiŋ! I dyewor ma tin gibikwanyo kwoni woko ki boti	“But God said to him, ‘You fool! This very night your life will be demanded from you
yoo ma aa ki woko pa mon ma citto i ot nyodo ma cuun donynyo iye i kare me ngotte 	a passage from the outside of a woman to the womb through which the penis passes during coitus 
con en laput nia i kare ma ginywale, pe omedo ki wot. 	He had been that way from birth and had never walked.
Wumot Urbano latic wadwa i Rwot, ki Citakic larema ma amaro. 	Greet Ampliatus, my dear friend in the Lord.
Pi kica pa Lubaŋa ma gimiya, omiyo aketo te guti me gedo macalo ladit me gedo ma ladiro	By the grace God has given me, I laid a foundation as a wise builder, and someone else is building on it
mak lakwoo caa 	arrest that thief 
gung maber ka wek girud ngeyi 	bend well so that your back may be rubbed 
En onoŋo oloko i kom Juda wod pa Cimon me Keriot, ŋat acel i kin jo-nu apar wiye aryo, ma bidobe.	Then Jesus replied, “Have I not chosen you, the Twelve? Yet one of you is a devil!”
poto anyogi ma pud gipurro a pura 	a maize field that has just been cultivated
Ento ka ilego, cit idony i kicikani ci ilor doggola woko, ka ileg Woru ma tye i muŋ	Then your Father, who sees what is done in secret, will reward you.
waarro moo ki iwii cak 	skimming the cream from the milk 
Yecu odok iye botgi ni, “Ada awaco botwu ni, ka onoŋo wutye ki niye, kun pe wukalo akala, onoŋo pe wutwero timo gin ma otimme i kom oduro-ni keken, ento kadi bed wuwac ki got man ni, ‘Mukke wek itiŋŋe ipot wa i nam’, ci bitimme bene. 	Early in the morning, as Jesus was on his way back to the city, he was hungry.
jo mukene lakucu knew dok pe peg rummo wiigi	these small gnats do not swarm around the heads of some people 
giwora nono, pwony ma gipwonyo obedo pwony ma mako kit pa dano.’” 	You hypocrites! Isaiah was right when he prophesied about you:
ocwallogi waraga 	he posted to them the letters 
giwang go cuci me kado atwonna 	the chaff is burnt for alkaline salt
twal en bene otimmo	he did it also 
nyal omakko lak tong woko 	the edge of the spear has become rusty 
gaa ma oo wii atii? 	who arrived first? 
gen gin maber mada 	trust is a very good thing 
Jo mogo i kin lupwony-cik ki Luparicayo guwaco bot Yecu ni, “Lapwony, wamito neno lanyut mo ma a ki boti.” 	For by your words you will be acquitted, and by your words you will be condemned.”
litino gucitto ka makko rec i kulo 	the children have gone to fish in the river
pal pal nyo papai en aye yat ma doigo mabor ma nyakko nyige ma donggo bene, ka nyigge ocek ci pokke ma woko ma atworo doko ma ocwak ocwak, ka giwanynyo pokke woko ci dong en papai kikomme ma obeddo ocwak ocwak nyo ma kwaar 	pawpaw or papaya, grows quite tall and produces big fruits which have green skin but when ripe it becomes yellow when the skin is removed, the pulp inside is usually yellow but some are also red
ilworro ngoo ma miyo pe icammo camme?	what are you fearing that makes you not to eat the food?
Pien ŋat ma gwoko cik ducu, ka ce opoto i cik acel keken, noŋo oturo cik ducu. 	For whoever keeps the whole law and yet stumbles at just one point is guilty of breaking all of it.
cak lye ka geerro 	the milk is being produced as seen by the distension of the breasts
pien abimiyowu twero me dok ki ryeko, ma ŋat mo i kin lukworwu pe bitwero ette i kome, kadi pyem kwede. 	For I will give you words and wisdom that none of your adversaries will be able to resist or contradict.
Man acoyo botwu pi jo ma twero rwenyowu. 	I am writing these things to you about those who are trying to lead you astray.
weer, en aye gijollo ki odii ka gitye ka reggo nyim   	weer is used as a receiver for simsim paste when the simsim is being ground
Dano mo twero donyo i ot pa ŋat ma kome tek niŋniŋ, ci cako yako jamine ducu, nio ka en otweyo laco meno ma kome tek-ki woko? Ka lacen doŋ cako yako ode. 	But if it is by the Spirit of God that I drive out demons, then the kingdom of God has come upon you.
Ka wuedonyo i ot koŋ wumot dano ma i ot meno. 	As you enter the home, give it your greeting.
kwin ringgo ki gadi gadi ma aguragura aye giywayo 	the queen travels in a carriage a coach pulled by horses
Olobo ki Otoo gitye ka cweyooro woko caa 	Olobo and Otoo are playing coro outside there 
En biketo deyo i koma, pien bikwanyo gin ma tuŋ bota, nyuttiwu. 	He will not speak on his own; he will speak only what he hears, and he will tell you what is yet to come.
kel wunu awal otwang, wek giony iye kongo, pi awobe wek gumatti 	bring the big narrow calabash bowl, so that the beer may be poured into it, for the youth to drink
rweyo tyen dano ma owil 	to massage massaging a sprained or strained ankle 
Ento en medde ki miyo kicane	But he gives us more grace
pot yat o oo piny madowong mada 	too many leaves have been shed
ngaa ma okwongo nngwec wii atii? 	who started running first? 
uci me kwoyo bongo  	thread for sewing clothes
dakone rac tonno lok twatwal 	she is a bad woman, she always speaks scornfully and arrogantly 
notto agulu mapud dyak ma gitye ka cweyone	to imprint the wet pot which is being made with a pattern
ka ilokko kwedde pe dokki maber time bene lakit timme mo ma pe niaggo dano pien kitte okani 	when you talk to him he does not answer well and behaves in a queer way because of his peculiarity
twoo nimoniya en aye twoo marac me oboo ma cakke ki aona matek ki lyetto , lacen ka omedde ci toppo oboo woko, ci dong geg go yweyo woko ma dong aa iye too 	pneumonia is a very serious disease of the lungs, which starts with severe cough and high fever and as it progresses, it destroys the lungs which then prevents breathing and this results in death
Ŋat ma onena, noŋo oneno ŋat ma oora. 	Then Jesus cried out, “Whoever believes in me does not believe in me only, but in the one who sent me.
Ento en owaco botgi ni, “Myero atit lok me kwena maber me ker pa Lubaŋa i gaŋ mukene bene, pien giora pi lok man.” 	But he said, “I must proclaim the good news of the kingdom of God to the other towns also, because that is why I was sent.”
Pien wan waŋeyo ŋat ma oloko ni, “An aye abiculo kwor, abiculo waŋe lacen,” dok ni, “Rwot biŋolo kop i kom jone.” 	For we know him who said, “It is mine to avenge; I will repay,” and again, “The Lord will judge his people.”
pok dyel ki dyangi pat pat 	separate the goats from the cows
en marro cammo ringo bat dyel mada 	he likes to eating foreleg meat of a goat
wang pa duka acel tin obeddo rac mada  	the burning of one of the shops was very bad
Yecu oceerro omin Maria 	close this road so that the people may not pass through here
oa ki i i ot kuno  	he came from within the house there
anenno kit ma dano gigoyo kwedde lukwoo marac twatwal 	I saw how people beat the thieves very badly 
pe imat taa 	do not smoke tobacco 
Yecu dok ocito i dog nam Galilaya	Once again Jesus went out beside the lake
otyekko lemmo kadone ki lebbe 	he has finished tasting the salt by licking it with his tongue 
ceer i kal wek otwoo maber 	it is of no use discussing anything with him because he insists too much on his idea 
Pien jo ma guoyo remo pa joni maleŋ, ki remo pa lutit lokki, in bene imiyo botgi remo me amatagi. Kakare, can meno oporo gin ma gutimo.” 	for they have shed the blood of your holy people and your prophets, and you have given them blood to drink as they deserve.”
ngabbo bongo i wii tol	to hang the clothes on the line 
lagalo en aye ma kobbo two me too wang nyo lokko kom joo beddo agara callo kom gee 	mbwa fly or simulum damnosum is the one that transmits the disease which causes blindness or makes the skin hard like that of an alligator
En bene yam oŋolo banya ducu ma gicoyo i wiwa pi cik ma ceŋ omiyo kop oloyowa, ocwalo cen ci oguro woko i kom yatariya. 	having been buried with him in baptism, in which you were also raised with him through your faith in the working of God, who raised him from the dead.
wuwinye.” 	While he was still speaking, a bright cloud covered them, and a voice from the cloud said, “This is my Son, whom I love; with him I am well pleased
tik joo mukene onynyo ka gulyello 	some other people's chins develop I get pimples after shaving
kal ma otorre i dye ot twerro jubbe maber 	the millet which is heaped up on the floor can be easily collected 
dok bene kit ma onyutta kwede muŋŋe, omiyo aŋeyo, macalo doŋ atyeko coyo pire macekcekki. 	Surely you have heard about the administration of God’s grace that was given to me for you,
Pien ŋat ma kette kene ni edit, gibidwoke piny, ento ŋat ma mwolle kene gibimiyo doko dit. 	The greatest among you will be your servant.
Dok bene dano ma bimiyo pii maŋic me amata bot ŋat acel i kom jo magi matino ni pien en obedo, lapwonnyena, ada awacciwu ni, pe bikeŋ bakacicce.”	And if anyone gives even a cup of cold water to one of these little ones who is my disciple, truly I tell you, that person will certainly not lose their reward.”
puk kado i dek ento pe madowong twatwal 	put some salt into the sauce but not too much 
latinne kite rac, wonne tye ka renno wiye 	the child has bad behaviour, the father is the one who is condoning it 
ryeye, kelo bwoyo i doge, nyoŋo kome woko, pe a ki i kome oyotoyot. 	It scarcely ever leaves him and is destroying him.
ka iwacci in lapac maber twatwal lanyutte tye kwene ma itwerro nyuttiwa? 	if you said that  you are a very good carpenter where is 
Yecu oloko ki gin carolok man, ento pe guniaŋ lok ma en otito botgi. 	But they will never follow a stranger; in fact, they will run away from him because they do not recognize a stranger’s voice.”
olege waraga me cito kwede i Damaciko, wek ka enoŋo dano ma lubo Yo ma gitye kunnu, co wa ki mon, ci etwegi, ekelgi i Jerucalem. 	and asked him for letters to the synagogues in Damascus, so that if he found any there who belonged to the Way, whether men or women, he might take them as prisoners to Jerusalem.
jamine gidwoggo tin	her things were returned today
Ka piny oru, ci piny ocako lyetti woko ki bot askari, ni Petero man otimme niŋniŋ. 	In the morning, there was no small commotion among the soldiers as to what had become of Peter.
I ot pa Lubaŋa onoŋo tye iye jo ma cato twoni ki romi ki amam, ki lulok-cente ma gubedo piny. 	When it was almost time for the Jewish Passover, Jesus went up to Jerusalem.
Lacere opotto ci opwacco congge 	Lacere fell and got his knee abraded or lacerated
gkiotte pi cunno dako pa lawotte 	he was accused of seducing his friend's wife,  
Walego Lubaŋa piwu ni pe wutim gin mo marac, pe me nyuto ni wan jo ma Lubaŋa pwoyo, ento wamito ni wun wutim gin maber, kadi bed wanen calo jo ma en pe opwoyo. 	And I trust that you will discover that we have not failed the test.
otwinyo matye i ummi ni twerro twinynye 	the mucus in your nose can be blown out
dwe tin otenne kama leng 	the moon today is in a clear sky by itself and shining brightly 
luur pii man maber me amatta 	filter this water carefully for drinking
Pi meno, an ma abedo lamabuc pi Rwot alegowu ni wulub kit kwo ma myero, ma rwatte ki lwoŋo ma yam gilwoŋowu iye.	And in him you too are being built together to become a dwelling in which God lives by his Spirit.
tye ki botti me binno kany 	it is up to you to come here 
“Nen, doŋ acwalowu me cito woko macalo romi i kin orudi	“I am sending you out like sheep among wolves
Ento an awaco botwu ni, Wumar lukworwu, dok bene wuleg Lubaŋa pi jo ma keto ayelayela i komwu, 	But I tell you, love your enemies and pray for those who persecute you,
Ŋat acel i kin lwak owaco bot Yecu ni, “Lapwony, wac bot omera wek wapok ginaleya kwede.” 	Someone in the crowd said to him, “Teacher, tell my brother to divide the inheritance with me.”
pien piwu tek twatwal makato pi ojwinyojwiny mapol. 	Don’t be afraid; you are worth more than many sparrows.
Ibiwaco ni, “Yam gituro jaŋe mogo ni wek gicoma i kom yat.” 	in the hope that I may somehow arouse my own people to envy and save some of them.
abaane lagoba mada	his father is a great liar
kadi gin ma tye malo, kadi gin ma tye piny, kadi ki gin mo keken i kom ginaketa ducu, pe bibedo ki twero mo me pokowa woko ki i kom mar pa Lubaŋa ma tye i Kricito Yecu Rwotwa.	For I am convinced that neither death nor life, neither angels nor demons, neither the present nor the future, nor any powers,
pwon (cim) ma itinggo i cinggi gin me tanggo mada pien miyo ilokko ki dano kama bor calo tye ka ngetti kany 	the mobile phone which is carried in the hand is a wonderful thing because it makes you speak to a man far away as if he is near you
cammo ringo madowong twatwal 	eating too much meat
lupwuu ka obeddo madowong odiko ci nyuttu ni kot pe oecweer inino meno nyo kono ceng keken en aye oeryeny 	when there is thick fog in the morning, it shows that it will not rain on that day, except that the sun only will shine
Ka kot doŋ omor omwoc tyen abiro, ci ayubbe ka coc, cutcut acako winyo dwan ma a ki i polo kun wacci, “Mwon lok ma mor kot abiro-ni guwaco woko, pe ico acoya.” 	And when the seven thunders spoke, I was about to write; but I heard a voice from heaven say, “Seal up what the seven thunders have said and do not write it down.”
Pe wuwek gibwolwu: “Bedo ki jo maraco balo kit mabeco.” 	Do not be misled: “Bad company corrupts good character.”
Ada awaco botwu ni, yalwak me kare man pe bitum nio waŋ ma lok magi ducu otimme. 	“Truly I tell you, this generation will certainly not pass away until all these things have happened.
Luparicayo ki lupwony-cik guŋur i kom lupwonnyene, kun gipenyo ni, “Piŋo wucamo dok wumato kacel ki lujog-mucoro ki lubalo?” 	Then Levi held a great banquet for Jesus at his house, and a large crowd of tax collectors and others were eating with them.
ngat ma latani myerro pe beddo i kin dano 	an abnormal person who has bad intention must not stay among the people
gukatto ni raka raka 	they passed quickly in all directions 
Wac ki opii ni guwor luditogi, guyom cwinygi i yo ducu. Pe gubed lupyem, 	and soundness of speech that cannot be condemned, so that those who oppose you may be ashamed because they have nothing bad to say about us.
Obedo ka loko botgi lok mapol i carolok, kun wacci, “Lacoc ocito ka coyo kodi. 	Then he told them many things in parables, saying: “A farmer went out to sow his seed.
tye ka lyerre pi kic ma gitye ka cammone 	he is hanging around for the honey which is being eaten 
kel anyogi ma gibullo me amwoda 	bring some grilled maize for eating
Onoŋo amito ni kono abino abedo kwedwu kombeddi, ka wek aniaŋ kit gin ma myero alok botwu ki kunnu, pien tamma i komwu doŋ ocuŋ woko ata. 	My dear children, for whom I am again in the pains of childbirth until Christ is formed in you,
cam pudi tye oluu	the food is not yet touched
ot ketto cik madit 	an important house for legislation 
jo Banyoro marro myel lacuku cuku mada 	a lizard can lose its tail but later it grows back
wod pa Cerug, wod pa Reu, wod pa Peleg, wod pa Eber, wod pa Cela, 	the son of Serug, the son of Reu, the son of Peleg, the son of Eber, the son of Shelah,
pali macek 	a pair of short trousers 
Dano ducu ma bino bota ma winyo lokka, dok tiyo, abinyuto botwu ŋat ma en cal kwede. 	As for everyone who comes to me and hears my words and puts them into practice, I will show you what they are like.
mitte me awilla 	desirable to be bought
Lacen owaco bot lupwonnyene ni, “Wadoku doki i Judaya.” 	So when he heard that Lazarus was sick, he stayed where he was two more days,
Yito ma oa ki i deyo pa Lubaŋa ki tekone omwono ot pa Lubaŋa woko limuk, ma ŋat mo onoŋo pe twero donyo iye, nio waŋ ma gemo abiro ma lumalaika abiro gukelo ca doŋ otum woko liweŋ.	And the temple was filled with smoke from the glory of God and from his power, and no one could enter the temple until the seven plagues of the seven angels were completed.
Lacen oterogi woko nio wa Betania, otiŋo ciŋe malo olamo gum i komgi. 	You are witnesses of these things.
en owacco yaani 	he said that, in a sarcastic way 
alworro wot ki bodaboda 	I am afraid of travelling by a bodaboda,
Abedo ki lworo matek, pien ticca ma ayelle kwede botwu, kara aneko iye koma nono. 	You are observing special days and months and seasons and years!
latin tye ka gubbo cak agubba pien lyet 	the child is taking a little by little the milk because it is hot 
twerro ryemme ka beddo ka binno lacen i dog ticce 	to dismiss a person from his work without him spoiling something or doing something bad is a very serious matter 
mon Karamoja gimaarro mada rukko otiko i pyergi 	the Karamajong women love very much to wear beads around their waists
I ticwa kacel ki Lubaŋa bene walego ni, kit ma doŋ wunoŋo kwede kica pa Lubaŋa-ni, pe wuwek oballe nono, 	Did I exploit you through any of the men I sent to you?
Cutcut dako mo ma nyare tye ki cen marac owinyo pire, ci obino oryebbe ka tyene. 	In fact, as soon as she heard about him, a woman whose little daughter was possessed by an impure spirit came and fell at his feet.
piyo latin ni ongoo lawotte	to incite the child to beat his friend
doo ma ipoto ni pe rac twatwal twerro doye 	the weed in this field is not very bad it can be weeded
Nen kadi kit meno, jo-nu bene i kit acel-lu, i lek ma gin leko, gubalo komgi woko, gukwero ker pa Lubaŋa woko, dok guyeto wegi deyo-gu bene ayeta. 	Though you already know all this, I want to remind you that the Lord at one time delivered his people out of Egypt, but later destroyed those who did not believe.
Iweny otuure oyot oyot mada laworo i duka 	fighting broke out suddenly yesterday in the shops
Meno nyuto ni, dumo leb mapatpat gimiyo wek obed lanyut bot jo ma pe guye Kricito, pe bot jo muye, ento tito lok pa Lubaŋa tye pi jo muye, pe pi jo ma pe guye. 	Tongues, then, are a sign, not for believers but for unbelievers; prophecy, however, is not for unbelievers but for believers.
cet nyonyo man ka gibukko ki mac malyet ci mee doko nyonyo 	this iron ore if put into intense heat, it melts into pure iron
lok goba ni twerro jukke ma pe woo 	your false matter can be prevented from spreading out
mac me Geena moko i kome. 	It corrupts the whole body, sets the whole course of one’s life on fire, and is itself set on fire by hell.
man pe jami me awi ento me camnar 	this is not for buy but for free 
Gin ducu welgi romo ka apar wiye aryo. 	There were about twelve men in all.
winynyo ni cogge mol ka ewotto 	he feels weak in his knees when walking 
botwa kany miri pe otiyo iye gin mo ma nen maber 	in our place here the government has not done any visibly important thing
litino gimaarro olemo matek 	the children love olemo very much
latinni wai pe mitto cam 	really or in truth this child does not want to eat
piyo latin ni ongoo lawotte	inciting the child to beat his friend
laromo ot tye i daan ot 	gecko is under the ceiling
gubeddo meegi ka lok pere-pere, pe guwinynyo gin mo, kun kono lakwoo tye ka kwallo mere tyen motokagi 	they were enganged in talking too much, and they did not hear anything, while a thief was stealing the tyre of their car
Pien dano acel acel tye ki yecce ma myero otiŋ. 	If anyone thinks they are something when they are not, they deceive themselves.
mon maarro wirro akura mada i komgi	the women love very much to smear themselves with perfumes
Laboŋo niye pe twerre me yomo cwinye, pien ŋat ma mito nyiko cok bot Lubaŋa myero oye ni en tye ada, dok bene ni en miyo bakacic bot jo ma yenye. 	And without faith it is impossible to please God, because anyone who comes to him must believe that he exists and that he rewards those who earnestly seek him.
nyub layata ki cak me amatta pa litino 	mix milk with sweet potatoes for the children to drink
Pyem yam ocakke i kingi, ni aŋa ma i kingi ma loyo ki dit. 	An argument started among the disciples as to which of them would be the greatest.
muggo mo manok 	confiding some points to somebody 
ngun dul dano man gucit i poto, mukene gucit i kullo 	divide into two: some of the people to go into the field and some to the river
mony madit me wii lobo ducu obeddo imwaka 1939-1945  	the Second World war was in the years of 1939-1945
timmo jwi jwi 	does it always 
danone mitto corre i tukko me dongge ki dano ma pekke katto meerre woko 	the man wants to dare to fight with a man whose weight is bigger than his, in the boxing game
pirro yoo gudo 	levelling the road 
Ŋat ma loyo, dok ma obedo ka tiyo ticca nio i agikki, abimiye twero me loyo lurok. 	To the one who is victorious and does my will to the end, I will give authority over the nations—
man lapaco meera 	this is my relative 
ikwanyo gin ma pe ikano, ikayo ka ma pe icoyo.’ 	You take out what you did not put in and reap what you did not sow.’
tic pa adwii en aye me timmo jami aranynyi keken laboggo teerre mo	the work of the terrorists is to commit havoc without any reason whatsoever
dano ducu gitye ka tic ni wici-wici maber mada 	all the people are working very well with speed 
pieno en ber pien cammo nyenye, ojiri, obeer, lwangi, ojuu ki mukene ducu ma gibeddo i ot 	for that reason, gecko is very good because it eats, cockroaches, small crickets, mosquitoes, houseflies, small flies and others which, are found in the house
Dok oloko botgi, ni “Adada awacciwu ni, tye jo mogo ma gucuŋ i kinwu kany ma pe gibibilo to wacel, nio waŋ ma guneno ka ker pa Lubaŋa doŋ otyeko bino ki tek.” 	And he said to them, “Truly I tell you, some who are standing here will not taste death before they see that the kingdom of God has come with power.”
Ka kare doŋ mito romo me tiŋe malo, ociko waŋe matek me cito i Jerucalem. 	As the time approached for him to be taken up to heaven, Jesus resolutely set out for Jerusalem.
yabbo wang latwoo	comforting and encouraging the patient
Pi meno amiyo ryeko boti me wilo jabu maleŋ ma giliyo woko maber ki mac ki bota, wek omi idok lalonyo. Wil bene boŋŋi matar ki bota me arukani wek ium ki lewic me bedoni munero wek pe doŋ onen, ki yat mo bene me wiro waŋi, wek inen piny. 	I counsel you to buy from me gold refined in the fire, so you can become rich; and white clothes to wear, so you can cover your shameful nakedness; and salve to put on your eyes, so you can see.
Oneka orwacco Lacere matek mada ingom 	Lacere was flung down by Oneka or was violently thrown down by Oneka
wot igwokke pe iyok tyeni ki tuko-lum pien gkiwog kany mada 	be careful as you walk from knocking your foot against the remains of burnt grass because they are many here
citto ka obbo mac 	going to make a fire 
cai ma nakanen ikello wiye atii, ononggo gic agica dok bene pe mit, man ma ikello kombeddi dok gitem tem 	the tea which you brought at first, was cold and had no taste, but the one you brought now is much better 
pe itimme timme tino kany 	do not behave like a child here 
twol pwodo yibe	the dead snake wriggles its tail
Burro gwok ki lakkii  	throwing a stone at the dong
lwokke ki pii ma ngic nino ducu jiggo kom	to take a cold bath every day invigorates the body
anyogine gipitto opikke woko 	the maize was planted too closely 
amor bene ber mada me jwayo jammi ma i ot 	the sponge is also very good for rubbing an house utensils
Pien jo mapol gibibino ki nyiŋa, ma giwacci, ‘An aye a en!’ ci gibimiyo jo mapol girwenyo woko. 	Many will come in my name, claiming, ‘I am he,’ and will deceive many.
Kit meno, utmegina, wuket cwinywu i tito lok pa Lubaŋa, lok me dumo leb mapatpat bene pe wugeŋ. 	Therefore, my brothers and sisters, be eager to prophesy, and do not forbid speaking in tongues.
an dong adiyo cai meera woko 	I have already signed it by putting my thumb mark 
jal li lokke pe mit ci olio dano oyot oyot 	the fellow's talk is not good therefore it bores the people quickly
Pi meno pe wubed ki par mapol kun wuwacci, ‘Wabicamo aŋo?’ nyo ni, ‘Wabimato aŋo?’ nyo ni, ‘Wabiruko aŋo?’ 	If that is how God clothes the grass of the field, which is here today and tomorrow is thrown into the fire, will he not much more clothe you—you of little faith?
Onoŋo tye dano mo laput nia i kare ma ginywale ma gitiŋo ci giketo i doggola ot pa Lubaŋa ma gilwoŋo Maber, pi lego kony bot jo ma gidonyo i ot. 	Now a man who was lame from birth was being carried to the temple gate called Beautiful, where he was put every day to beg from those going into the temple courts.
Wan wadiyo cwinywa maber, kun watamo ni twra wawot ma wabwoto komwa woko, wabed paco bot Rwot. 	For we live by faith, not by sight.
dano gugoyo layak moni matek mada kany ma gumitto nekkone woko 	the people beat very badly here a certain robber and they nearly killed him
En obedo ka tito lok i kacokke me Judaya.	And he kept on preaching in the synagogues of Judea.
opotto ni pac 	it fell heavily with a sound on the ground 
yatti dong tye ka tal woko do  	this tree is drying up!
Yecu openyogi ni, “Aŋa i kinwu ma ka tye ki romo acel ce romo meno opoto i bur i ceŋ cabit, en pe bimako ywayo kelo woko ka maleŋ? 	Going on from that place, he went into their synagogue,
bed piny i nom 	sit down on the ground 
waarro moo ki iwii cak	to skim the cream from the milk 
ka imitto coyo joonu ma gunino ci myerro ired aredda matek 	when you want to wake those people when they are asleep, you must shout very hard 
kapet man dong opong ki apwa madowong mada mitto ategga tin 	this carpet is now full of dust, it needs to be dusted today
jwii doki aye ka itek 	hiss again if you think you are strong
en tye ning ning? 	how is he? 
wog woko ki cet dyel 	the raised floor is now full of goat's droppings
Gipwo Lubaŋa pi motte maber ma pe wacce.	And in their prayers for you their hearts will go out to you, because of the surpassing grace God has given you.
ologone ngoro, layo teretere twatwal 	he has a poor bladder, he passes urine too frequently
Ento wun lurema ma amaro, myero wupo i lok ma yam lukwena pa Rwotwa Yecu Kricito gutito pire con. 	These people are grumblers and faultfinders; they follow their own evil desires; they boast about themselves and flatter others for their own advantage.
ci dako mo obino bote kun tye ki adomo moo ma ŋwece kur, ma welle bene dit, ci oonyo i wiye ma onoŋo en obedo ka cam. 	a woman came to him with an alabaster jar of very expensive perfume, which she poured on his head as he was reclining at the table.
wac kom ngao dano timmo gin mo me konynye kene 	laziness prevents a man to do something to help himself
gucitto ka cakko nying latin i kanica 	they went for the baptism of the child in the church
ma yam giloko pire ni, “Litino pa Icaka aye gibilwoŋogi ni likwayu.” 	even though God had said to him, “It is through Isaac that your offspring will be reckoned.”
lut bongi i pit wek okwany cilogi woko 	dip or immerse the clothes into the water to soak them 
En otuco ka maleŋ, pe omuŋo, otuco ni, “An pe a Kricito ma Lubaŋa oyero.” 	Now this was John’s testimony when the Jewish leaders in Jerusalem sent priests and Levites to ask him who he was.
pok labolo man ka dong link ki latin ocam 	peel this banana and then give it to the child to eat
ajut yat oyokko tyenna	a stump has hurt my foot 
jwik mol pa piine 	reduce the flow of the water
kel latok dek wek gitok ki cam 	bring the ladle or calabash cup so that food may be dished with it 
icommo kongone maber? 	have you diluted the beer 
ento i kare ma bino anyim ca wabinenne waŋ ki waŋ. Kombeddi aŋeyo dul mo manok keken, ento i nino ma bino anyim ca abibedo ki ŋec ducu liweŋ, kit macalo Lubaŋa tye ki ŋec ducu i koma-ni. 	Now I know in part; then I shall know fully, even as I am fully known.
latin man dok twoyo laykio twatwal, badde ducu oonyo woko 	this child is suffering very much from severe dermatitis, the arms are full of rashes
Ento jo magi giyeto gin ma pe giniaŋ iye, ento gin ma giŋeyo pi lubo kit ma giketogi kwede, macalo lee ma pe ryek, tye ka tyekogi woko. 	But even the archangel Michael, when he was disputing with the devil about the body of Moses, did not himself dare to condemn him for slander but said, “The Lord rebuke you!”
“Pud atye ki lok mapol me awaca botwu, ento pe wutwero kanyo koni. 	and about judgment, because the prince of this world now stands condemned.
litinone gimaarro cam akuri akuri mada	those or his children like to eat jt by bit at frequent times
Obal lawot mada, meno aye dano ma itwerro citto kwede ka dwar 	Obal is a great traveller, he is the one with whom you can go to hunt
mon gucitto ka dinno kalgi i wii leela 	the women went to thresh their millet on the flat stone
gitye ka joggo cam pi jo lurig ayella 	they are collecting food for the refugees 
Ŋat ma tye ki it me winyone owiny.” 	Whoever has ears, let them hear.”
man pud abwora bonyo keken, madowongge odong igec	this is just the first small part of the locusts, the main part is still behind
luker wotto ki motoka ma lik lik keken 	the royal family travel in limousines only
pirro yoo gudo	levelling the road 
ryany kwon madit ki litino me acamma 	make big kwon for the children to eat 
Ci jo muye lok ma en owaco botgi gibatijagi, ci gumedde i nino meno jo ma romo alip adek. 	Those who accepted his message were baptized, and about three thousand were added to their number that day.
pien yam owacci, ‘An a Wod pa Lubaŋa.’” 	He trusts in God
yatte twero putte	the tree can be uprooted
guny pa kongo nyutto ni kongone dong ocek maber me amatta  	bubbling of the beer shows that the beer is now ready for drinking
Ento ka ce gedo pa dano mo owaŋ woko, ci en pe binoŋo kabacic mo me pwoc, ento en kikome bibwot, macalo ŋat ma koŋ owok ki i mac ka doŋ okatti ka maleŋ. 	If it is burned up, the builder will suffer loss but yet will be saved—even though only as one escaping through the flames.
Ber, doŋ wucob tic pa kwariwu! 	So you testify against yourselves that you are the descendants of those who murdered the prophets.
latin lacoo latin nyako loyerro pe gubed ka nyebbe ka cod 	a boy and a girl must not get used illicit sexual intercourse
pe irut lok kuno 	do not instigate or incite trouble there 
panne dong apanna ki dano 	hides himself from the people
bur ma okwot i emme twerro bogge ka dong ocek me abarra 	the swelling in his thigh can be palpated if it is ready for incision
won ot 	husband or owner of the house
gwel Ojok obin kany 	beckon to Ojok to come here
Ento Citefano noŋo opoŋ ki Cwiny Maleŋ, ci ociko waŋe i polo oneno deyo pa Lubaŋa, kun Yecu ocuŋ i ŋet Lubaŋa yo tuŋ acuc, 	But Stephen, full of the Holy Spirit, looked up to heaven and saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing at the right hand of God.
pe wupar pi cacce, pien en merre nino ducu lacac kitmeno 	do not worry about his despise because he is always despising 
Ci Lubaŋa owaco ni likwaye gibibedo i lobo pa jo mukene ma gibilokogi gubedo opiigi, gitimogi marac pi mwaka miya aŋwen. 	God spoke to him in this way: ‘For four hundred years your descendants will be strangers in a country not their own, and they will be enslaved and mistreated.
Ka Yecu okato woko ki i yeya, ci cutcut dano mo ma tye ki cen marac obino bote, ma oa ki i kabedo ka ma giyiko iye jo muto. 	When Jesus got out of the boat, a man with an impure spirit came from the tombs to meet him.
timmo jammine nino ducu alii alii 	he always does his things secretly
kun waco ni, ‘Kornelio, legani otyeko winnye, ki motti me kony bene gipo pigi i nyim Lubaŋa. 	and said, ‘Cornelius, God has heard your prayer and remembered your gifts to the poor.
Ka kono gin ducu gubedo dul acel, kom kono obedo kwene? 	If they were all one part, where would the body be?
ka doŋ egony jo ma yam gubedo i twec me opii pi kare me kwogi ducu pi lworo to. 	and free those who all their lives were held in slavery by their fear of death.
pwod latin pi gin ma en oballo 	cane the child for the bad thing he has done 
Gin ducu gucamo guyeŋ. Gicoko ŋide mudoŋ oromo aduku apar wiye aryo. 	They all ate and were satisfied, and the disciples picked up twelve basketfuls of broken pieces that were left over.
Ci en ocito okwanyo buk adola woko ki i ciŋ ŋat ma onoŋo obedo i wi komker ma onoŋo omako tuŋ lacuc-ci. 	He went and took the scroll from the right hand of him who sat on the throne.
ngat mape ngeyo legga nonggo wiye pe tye maber 	anybody who does not know about prayer, something must be wrong with his head
Pe tye ŋat mo ma yam oito i wi polo, kono en ma ceŋ olor piny nia ki i polo, en aye Wod pa dano, ma bedo i polo. 	I have spoken to you of earthly things and you do not believe; how then will you believe if I speak of heavenly things?
Dok dul ginacoya mukene owaco ni, “Gibineno ŋat ma gicobo.” 	These things happened so that the scripture would be fulfilled: “Not one of his bones will be broken,”
Pilato dok openye ni, “Pe koŋ idok iye ce? Pe ineno kit lwak lok mapol ma gidoti kwede-ni?” 	So again Pilate asked him, “Aren’t you going to answer? See how many things they are accusing you of.”
latin ka pe winynyo juc pa wonne ci petwerro beddo maber 	if a child does not listen to his father's warning he will not be good 
nywarro dano pe ber 	abusing people is not good
Ket tek kit macalo itwero pi mine keni bot lubaŋa macalo ŋat ma gipwoyo, latic ma pe ki gin mo ma lewic myero omake iye, ma tero lok me ada i yo atir. 	if we are faithless, he remains faithful, for he cannot disown himself.
piir pii pong i agulu man 	fill this pot with water full to the brim 
nyakone pwot? pe aneno ka kit pwotte 	is the girls slender? no I did not notice her slenderness
onyommo nyako ma mono kwedde	he married an unsuitable girl for him  
dim lok	getting involved in a case
banyane twerro culle 	the debts can be paid 
Piŋo iŋolo kop i kom omeru? Nyo in, piŋo icayo omeru? Wan ducu wabicuŋ i nyim komker me ŋolo kop pa Lubaŋa. 	For this very reason, Christ died and returned to life so that he might be the Lord of both the dead and the living.
Ka Yecu odwogo, lwak gujole ki yomcwiny, pien onoŋo gin ducu gitye ka kure. 	Now when Jesus returned, a crowd welcomed him, for they were all expecting him.
Gin ma Lubaŋa oribo kacel dano pe opok kingi.” 	Therefore what God has joined together, let no one separate.”
en Kricito ma yam omine kene pi balwa wek elarwa woko ki i gin marac me kare man, kun lubo gin ma Lubaŋa Wonwa mito. 	Grace and peace to you from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ,
kella cwiit anang 	bring for me some sweets to suck
tut myerro pe gut i bur ka gibarro maber 	the pus should not remain in the cavity if the swelling was well incised 
wacittu ka nenno lagoga 	a jester or a clown always has many friends 
Pien pi temo tiyo gin ma cik mito omiyo yam ato pi cik, wek abed kwo tuŋ bot Lubaŋa. 	If I rebuild what I destroyed, then I really would be a lawbreaker.
Pien dano ma mito laro kwone, birwenyone arwenya, ento dano ma rwenyo kwone pira, bilaro kwone. 	For whoever wants to save their life will lose it, but whoever loses their life for me will save it.
Yam aciki ni iwek dano gubed ki mar ma dano bedo kwede ka cwinye leŋ dok kite ber ma pe ki bala mo i kome, dok ma niyene goba pe iye. 	As I urged you when I went into Macedonia, stay there in Ephesus so that you may command certain people not to teach false doctrines any longer
gii gin angoo matye ka yello latinni 	find out what is bothering the child
yurru tic ayurra 	working half heartedly, indolently without determination
pur poto maber 	cultivate the field well 
Ento gin pe guniaŋ kit lokke-nu, dok gulworo penye. 	But they did not understand what he meant and were afraid to ask him about it.
Pi lok man, giketa me bedo latit-lok dok lakwena, (aloko lok ada, goba pe iye), an lapwony pa Lurok, i niye ki i lok ada. 	This has now been witnessed to at the proper time.
Ka Yecu otyeko loko lok man, ci owoto anyim kun cito malo i Jerucalem. 	After Jesus had said this, he went on ahead, going up to Jerusalem.
Guwacce ni, “Lupwonnye pa Jon giri kec kare ki kare, dok gilego bene, ki pa Luparicayo bene kit meno, ento lupwonnyeni gicamo dok gimato do.” 	I have not come to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.”
pii mitte me amedda i yat man ka wek omatte, pien kec twatwal 	some water needs to be added to this medicine so that it can be taken because it is too bitter
Lubaŋa bene tye acel ma en aye Won dano ducu. En loyo jami ducu, tiyo i gin ducu, dok bene tye i gin ducu.	one Lord, one faith, one baptism;
Lubanga en aye labed naka naka 	God is the one who lives forever and ever
Ento wan waneno Yecu ma yam gikete ki piny i te lumalaika pi kare manoknok, ento kombeddi doŋ gimiye deyo ki woro macalo kabaka pi arem me to ma en ociro, wek pi kica pa Lubaŋa ebil to pi jo ducu. 	But we do see Jesus, who was made lower than the angels for a little while, now crowned with glory and honor because he suffered death, so that by the grace of God he might taste death for everyone.
En ma ojeŋŋe i kor Yecu openye ni, “Aŋa, Rwot?” 	Simon Peter motioned to this disciple and said, “Ask him which one he means.”
ginno kwon maber 	shaping the kwon very well into balls
macce taar mada 	the light is very bright 
tic ma pirre tek pa miri ma myerro gitii 	official government work that must be done 
Yecu obolo carolok ni, “Yam tye dano mo ma onoŋo tye ki oduro ma gipito i poto olokke. En obino kun yenyo nyige, ento pe onoŋo. 	Then he told this parable: “A man had a fig tree growing in his vineyard, and he went to look for fruit on it but did not find any.
wel pulle adii? 	how much is the price of the groundnuts?
motoka meeri ni dok tworw tworw ento meerani dong rac twatwal 	your car is slightly better but mine is very bad
Gin doŋ guloye woko pi remo pa Latin romo, ki pi lok me caden ma gubedo ka tucone, dok bene pe guparo pi kwogi, ento gumine kengi kadi wa i to. 	They triumphed over him by the blood of the Lamb and by the word of their testimony; they did not love their lives so much as to shrink from death.
Bot jo pa Lubaŋa ki utmego ma genne i Kolocai, ma gitye i Kricito: Lubaŋa Wonwa omiwu kica kikuc. 	Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus by the will of God, and Timothy our brother,
ci gutimo kit meno, ka gucwalo bot ludoŋo kun Barnaba ki Caulo aye gitero.	This they did, sending their gift to the elders by Barnabas and Saul.
ajuc obeddo i get yoo ka leggo lim	an old man is sitting gucokke i ajog me lim me konynyo beside the road begging for money
I kare ma Luparicayo doŋ gucokke kacel, Yecu openyogi kun wacci, 	All the Law and the Prophets hang on these two commandments.”
tye kit amuka aryo, macol ki mataar 	there are two types of the rinocheros the black and the white 
yatti twero nwengge 	with dexterity, the tree can be climbed
cam dong odong manok mada myerro dong wutin atinna 	there is a little food remaning therefore you must eat little by little
be ma giguurro me tweyo iye dyel 	a peg fixed in the ground for tying the goat on 
latin ne kitte rac mada maarro kac twatwal ka tye kalweny ki ngati mo 	the child is very bad because he likes very much to bite the opponent when fighting
cwik nyo cwak ummi 	draw breath in through your nose
dano ma ladiro mada 	he is a good craftsman 
pe iwek latin obed ka tukko ki lapil pil pa koo pien ngollo cinge woko 	do not leave the child to play with a splinter of bamboo because it will cut her hands
en rokke kwene? 	what is his tribe? 
temme me kwan matek	try by yourself to read very hard
“An aye olok me ada, Abana en lapur. 	So whatever I say is just what the Father has told me to say.”
paco tic pe iye owekko Wino gitye ka mal ata 	there is no work at home and that is why the children are roaming about aimlessly 
lem latin okwoor 	who are the people who will be herding the cattle to graze in the pasture? 
gido ringo me abulla 	cutting the meat for grilling
obeddo naka nioo ka adwoggo 	he stayed on until I returned 
Lacen doki aneno pol matar, ki ŋat mo obedo i wi pol ma cal ki wod pa dano. Lalukana jabu onoŋo tye i wiye, ki pala kac mabit bene onoŋo tye i ciŋe. 	I looked, and there before me was a white cloud, and seated on the cloud was one like a son of man with a crown of gold on his head and a sharp sickle in his hand.
odii pul bene mit mada me abagga ki layata, labolo nyo mugati 	the groundnut paste also is very good to eat with potatoes, bananas, or bread
Lwak opego mapol onoŋo gitye ka cam ka ma onoŋo gitye ka lok iye. 	They were so violent that no one could pass that way.
Rwot owacce ni, “Wun Luparicayo wulwoko ŋe kikopo ki ŋe atabo, kun iwu opoŋ yak ki tim maraco. 	You foolish people! Did not the one who made the outside make the inside also?
Ka ce Lubaŋa omiyogi mot ma rom ki ma omiyowa i kare ma waye iye Rwot Yecu Kricito, ci an aŋa ma atwero pyem ki Lubaŋa?” 	So if God gave them the same gift he gave us who believed in the Lord Jesus Christ, who was I to think that I could stand in God’s way?”
Waraga man oa ki bot Paulo ma en lakwena. Pe dano mogo aye ma ceŋ guore, or ma mere me bedo lakwena pe yam owok ki bot dano mo, ento oa ki bot Yecu Kricito ki bot Lubaŋa Won ma ceŋ ocere woko ki i kin jo muto. 	Therefore, brothers and sisters, we are not children of the slave woman, but of the free woman.
gimakkongi ka ger 	they were caught having sexual intercourse
pot dek ducu ma pat pat kombeddi dong nogge i cuk mewa 	all variety of green vegetables are now available in our market 
ki me adekke bene gulako dako-nu, kit meno gin abiro ducu gubedo ki dako-nu, guto laboŋo litino. 	and then the third married her, and in the same way the seven died, leaving no children.
Ento pe tye ŋat mo ma waco nyiŋe ka maleŋ, pien gilworo Lujudaya. 	Now at the festival the Jewish leaders were watching for Jesus and asking, “Where is he?”
apurro poto me ature keken 	I do cultivate fields only for flowers
liyo pii me loggo	to pour water for washing the hands
wupitte ki cam, kun wucwe giwu, ento nino me nekowu doŋ oromo! 	You have fattened yourselves in the day of slaughter.
danone moc kommme pe 	he is thin and wasted 
Latinna Temceo, amiyo boti cik man ma rwatte ki lok ma yam lutit lok pa Lubaŋa guloko i komi, 	But for that very reason I was shown mercy so that in me, the worst of sinners, Christ Jesus might display his immense patience as an example for those who would believe in him and receive eternal life.
Oryem oculo dyangi adek me lacurubee pi porro dako pa Okec 	Oryem paid as lacurubee, three heads of cattle for eloping with the wife of Okec
Ber wacam kun wabedo ki yomcwiny, pien omeruni yam oto, koni doŋ kwo, yam orwenyo, doŋ ginoŋe.’ ”	But we had to celebrate and be glad, because this brother of yours was dead and is alive again; he was lost and is found.’”
‘Ladit, onoŋo nene imiya ciliŋ alip aryo nen dok anoŋo ciliŋ alip aryo mukene.’ 	‘Master,’ he said, ‘you entrusted me with two bags of gold; see, I have gained two more.’
Mumiyo lwak dano ducu ma i gaŋ meno gubino ka rwatte ki Yecu	Those tending the pigs ran off, went into the town and reported all this, including what had happened to the demon-possessed men.
majan gipimmo kwede ki ringo 	weighing machine is for weighing meat
Doŋ ineno ni dano gikwane ni kite atir pi tic, ento pe pi niye keken. 	You see that a person is considered righteous by what they do and not by faith alone.
en gweyo odilo maber mada 	he plays football very well 
pud gitye ka cikke ki ominne ma oecitto woko i lobo ma woko 	they are bidding farewell to each other with his brother who is going overseas
tit lok pa Lubanga ki dano wek guwiny 	preach to the people God's words so that they may hear
kadi ringo maber joo mukene gimitti kong gijii ka dong gital manok wek obed ma mit botti mada 	even fresh good meat some of the people like it to be half cooked and then half smoked to make it very nice for them
Ento ki tuŋ bot Lurok ma guye Rwot watyeko cwalo waraga botgi ki lok ma waŋolo ni, pe gucam gin ma gityero bot jogi, pe gucam remo, ki riŋo lee ma gideyo adeya, gukwer bene tim tarwaŋ.” 	As for the Gentile believers, we have written to them our decision that they should abstain from food sacrificed to idols, from blood, from the meat of strangled animals and from sexual immorality.”
kweyo ma opong i wang it twerro olle 	the sand that has blocked the water well can be removed
Kodi mukene okir i kin okuto, okuto olot odiyogi woko. 	Other seed fell among thorns, which grew up and choked the plants.
wuwek burogi obedi, kun wupo ni ladit ma loyogi wa ki wun bene tye i polo, en tero jo ducu maromrom. 	And masters, treat your slaves in the same way
tinggo candukke obwoya woko pien pek twatwal 	carrying the box has defeated me becase it is too heavy 
iyo, Wora, pien onoŋo ipwoyo kit yo macalo meno. 	Yes, Father, for this is what you were pleased to do.
dano munyoo ni pe gingeyo gall moo 	the people of these days know nobody
itto yat 	climbing the tree 
Pe wuŋeyo ni, jo ma gipyem i ŋwec ducu giriŋo, ento dano acel keken aye ma limo mot me pwoc? Wun bene wuriŋ kumeno wek wunoŋ mot me pwoc. 	Do you not know that in a race all the runners run, but only one gets the prize? Run in such a way as to get the prize.
macalo jo ma guneno ki waŋgi nia i acakki, dok ma gudoko lutic me lok meno, gukwaŋo botwa. 	just as they were handed down to us by those who from the first were eyewitnesses and servants of the word.
Wan waye lok me caden ma dano gimiyo, ento caden pa Lubaŋa dit kato megi woko Man aye lok me caden pa Lubaŋa, ma en omiyo i kom Wode. 	We accept human testimony, but God’s testimony is greater because it is the testimony of God, which he has given about his Son.
gudotte ni gin aye ma giballo kompwuta 	they accused themselves that they were the ones who spoiled the computer
kado dekke kec mada mitto pii me acomma i iye ka wek obed mamit	There is too much salt in the food, it needs water to be added to it to make it nice
ka idag gin mo pe konynyo me jakko lok ajaka iye, wac atir ni adaggi 	if you don't like something ,do not speak haughtily about it, simply say I do not want it
Ento dako gire ka yer wiye olot maboco meno bedo me deyo bote, pien gimiye yer maboco-nu me umme kwede. 	but that if a woman has long hair, it is her glory? For long hair is given to her as a covering.
rummo cong  	kneeling on the knees
bin iyeya 	come and help me to place it on my head
Cutcut Catan oweke, ci lumalaika gubino gukonye. 	Then the devil left him, and angels came and attended him.
Ento Yecu odok iye owaco botgi ni, “Yalwak pa jo maraco ki lutim abor giyenyo lanyut, ento pe gibimiyo botgi lanyut mo kono lanyut pa lanebi Yona keken. 	Then some of the Pharisees and teachers of the law said to him, “Teacher, we want to see a sign from you.”
Luparicayo gucito guporo lok kit macalo myero gimak kwede lok ma a i doge. 	“For many are invited, but few are chosen.”
ket oywec i gut ot  	put the sweeping broom in the corner of the house
awekkongi ononggo pud gitye ka motte 	I left them while they were still greeting each other
Wamoku matek likiŋ i gen ma watuco, laboŋo tagge atata, pien ŋat ma ocikowa-ni lagen. 	Let us hold unswervingly to the hope we profess, for he who promised is faithful.
Ento ka gilwoŋi, cit ibed i kabedo mapiny, wek ka dano ma olwoŋi obino en biwacci ni, ‘Larema, nyik i kom mamalo’, ci ibibedo ki deyo i nyim dano ducu ma wubedo kwedgi i dog cam. 	But when you are invited, take the lowest place, so that when your host comes, he will say to you, ‘Friend, move up to a better place.’ Then you will be honored in the presence of all the other guests.
ka imitti inek ladep maber ci giny woko 	if you want to kill the fleas very well, crush them 
palaa ne purre pe ber 	the knife's handle is not good 
ryekko i dyang, ryekko i dyel, ki mukene	to open the cow's, goats and others abdomens
Yecu dok odaŋŋe ki dwan maloŋo, ka oto. 	With a loud cry, Jesus breathed his last.
anyaka tye ka lyakko nyim kwica 	a girl is grinding very smoothly simsim paste there
coo latin woko, cawa dong oromo me citto ka kwan 	wake up the child, it is time to go to study
ento otima kica pi lok man, wek i kin lubalo, Yecu Kricito okwoŋ nyuto diyo cwinye maber-ri bota macalo lanen bot jo mukene ma gibiye en, ka doŋ gicako noŋo kwo ma pe tum. 	Here is a trustworthy saying that deserves full acceptance: Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners—of whom I am the worst.
mon Atiak gubinno ma gurukko pongo woko i badgi ka myel 	the Atiak women came to dance with the ivory armlets worn on their arms
latinni tye ka cucce pi kic ma gitye ka cammone i ot	the child is hanging around for the honey which is being eaten in the house
wiyo tol lajwac 	a small brush made for rubbing out bits of food remaining in between the teeth
Wubed ki kit maber i kin jo ma pe giŋeyo Lubaŋa, wek ka ce giyetowu ni wun lutim gin marac, gunen tic maber ma wutiyo, wek bene gumi deyo bot Lubaŋa i nino ma en bibino ka ŋolo kop iye. 	Dear friends, I urge you, as foreigners and exiles, to abstain from sinful desires, which wage war against your soul.
dano mogo maarro ringo atalla mada 	some people love very much grilled meat
lokke okubbe ki man 	the matter is connected to this 
aita ma cammo pul mewa twatwal ki i potoni, laworo omokko woko i odig 	the squirrel that eats very much groundnuts from our field was caught in a trap yesterday
yatte twerro rubbe maber 	the medicine can be mixed very well
piny pud dyak  	the ground is still wet
tye ka yeggo olang 	is ringing the bell 
amitto gweno lakuru en aye me kwer 	I want a stunted chicken for sacrifice
Ci komgi muto biradde i dye yo me gaŋ madit, ma i carolok gilwoŋo nyiŋe ni Codom, ki dok ni Ejipt, en bene ka ma yam giguro iye Rwotgi i kom yatariya. 	Their bodies will lie in the public square of the great city—which is figuratively called Sodom and Egypt—where also their Lord was crucified.
tyen leela pe tye ka wirre maber 	the bicycle wheel is not revolving very well
lacat wil acel keken oa aye maarro binno kany gicel Meet 	there is only one trader who ocasionally comes here 
En gin mumiyo Lubaŋa omoko cikkene ki kwoŋ, pien onoŋo mito nyuto maber twatwal bot jo ma myero gunoŋ gin ma giciko pire ni, gin ma en doŋ etyeko yubo, pe dok ebiloko woko. 	Because God wanted to make the unchanging nature of his purpose very clear to the heirs of what was promised, he confirmed it with an oath.
“Kica maka i kom lwak man, pien gutyeko bedo kweda kany pi nino adek ma kun pe gitye ki camgi mo. 	“I have compassion for these people; they have already been with me three days and have nothing to eat.
dano ma layel pe mitte kany 	a troublesome person is not wanted here
otimmo makko lewic mada 	what the child did brings shame
nyuka anyogi ki me nano bene mit mada ka girubbogi ki cak 	the maize and wheat porrdige are very nice when mixed with milk
pe angeyo ka lee tin wee botwa 	I do not know whether today we shall have plenty of animals according to our expectation 
pimmo kare maber me timmo gin mo	waiting for the right time to do something
okwalle akwalla ka ocakko donynyo i ot	he came quietly and noiselessly and then entered the house 
ket Latin piny wek omul 	put the child down and let him crawl 
latin mape nngeyo cura pe twerro kwan maber 	a child who does not know mathematics cannot study well 
bin i ngenino abic 	come in five days time 
Wuwor jo mukene, wubed mwol, dok wubed jo ma ciro gin ducu ma balo cwiny dano, kun ŋat acel acel diyo cwinye i kom lawote ki mar.	As a prisoner for the Lord, then, I urge you to live a life worthy of the calling you have received.
I kare ma acako lok, ci Cwiny Maleŋ opye i komgi kit ma con okwoŋo pye i komwa-ni, 	“As I began to speak, the Holy Spirit came on them as he had come on us at the beginning.
gin wic macol ber katto kit rangi mukene 	black hat is better than any other colour
adongi Moo marac ma tello tok woko matek ma wic dong pe twerro kulle nyo lokke tunggi ki tunggi	cerebrospinal meningitis is a very dangerous disease, which causes stiffness of the neck and prevents it from bending or turning side to side
kweri otonggo lwet tyenne adek woko	his three toes have been cut by the hoe
Atoo ogerro Pawel 	Atoo has been married in Pawel
i rweny callo palaa ma akili ma orweny	you are lost like a knife without a handle which is lost
nyatte meeri ni nyayo nyerro ki dano 	your boasting makes people laugh at you or look down upon you
Gupenye ni, “Waŋi oyabbe niŋniŋ?” 	Others said, “No, he only looks like him.” But he himself insisted, “I am the man.”
Cimon Petero openye ni, “Rwot, icito kwene?” Yecu ogamo ni, “Ka ma acito iye, pe itwero luba koni, ento ibiluba lacen.” 	By this everyone will know that you are my disciples, if you love one another.”
twol acak acak tye ka munynyo oyoo ma omakko	a whitish green snake is swallowing a rat which it has caught
ruu dano ka tic matek 	impel people to work hard
Caulo bene opwoyo tone apwoya. I kare meno ayelayela madwoŋ opoto i kom jo muye Yecu ma i Jerucalem	And Saul approved of their killing him
ento Lurok bigeno gin maber pi nyiŋe.”	“Here is my servant whom I have chosen, the one I love, in whom I delight; I will put my Spirit on him, and he will proclaim justice to the nations.
Dok i kin wun kikomwu bene bia iye jo ma gibiloko lok ma ŋako dano ci gibwolo lupwonnye miyo gilubo korgi. 	Even from your own number men will arise and distort the truth in order to draw away disciples after them.
danone labumma mada gwokke kwedde 	be careful with that man, he is a swindler or a conman
pien en timo ber bot jo ma pe pwoye ki bot jo maraco. 	Then your reward will be great, and you will be children of the Most High, because he is kind to the ungrateful and wicked.
Ci lok pa Lubaŋa omedde	So the word of God spread
opakko lyedi ni cwet cwet 	he sharpened the razor on the stone with that sound
dano mukene gimaarro matte cak lukulo mada	some people like very much drinking coagulated milk
welo adii ma obinno tin? 	how many guests arrived today? 
jami ne twerro omme 	the things can be brought
kweyo ma opong i wang it twerro olle 	the sand that has blocked the water well can be cleared
Dano ducu ma guwinyo guwaco ni, “Ci aŋa ma twero larre?” 	Those who heard this asked, “Who then can be saved?”
aweno bene dong twerro pitte i gang 	the guinea fowls can also be reared at home
guur dek nngor wek gleam 	smash or mash cooked cowpeas with a pestle
wua woko ki i nyima, wun lutim maraco ducu!’ 	Away from me, all you evildoers!’
Ento ŋat ma Lubaŋa ocero woko-ni kome pe otop. 	But the one whom God raised from the dead did not see decay.
raa ullo pii 	the hippopotamus stirs the water by pushing it about
En pe obedo nyap i niye i kare ma obedo ka paro pi kome kekene, ma onoŋo yam rom aroma ki gin ma oto, pien mwaka me ditte onoŋo doŋ cok romo miya acel kulu, dok bene medo i kom meno, dakone Cara onoŋo lalur. 	Against all hope, Abraham in hope believed and so became the father of many nations, just as it had been said to him, “So shall your offspring be.”
latinne kitte ber mada pien ocwallo waraga me pwoc pi jami ducu ma gitimmo maber pirre 	the child is very good, because he sent them a letter of thankfulness for all the good things that were doing for him
ka doŋ olot, wuneno piwu kenwu, ci wuŋeyo ni oro doŋ cok. 	When they sprout leaves, you can see for yourselves and know that summer is near.
tyerro atabo dek ki lwak 	to offer before the people dishes to eat
motoka ma opottoni twerro ille? 	the overtumed car can it be lifted or raised up
cung pee icitti 	stop, don't go
gingolle cul me dyel aryo  	he was fined or ask to pay two goats
utic gujaar woko i kom joo ma gumiyogi tic 	the workers rose up or rebelled against their employers
Pe wuneno ni gin ma donyo i dog dano kato cito i ic, kit meno a ki kunnu kato woko? 	“Are you still so dull?” Jesus asked them.
Doŋ ka ŋat mo mito kelo pyem iye, wan giwa wape ki kit macalo meno, pe bene tye i kin jo ducu muye Lubaŋa. 	If anyone wants to be contentious about this, we have no other practice—nor do the churches of God.
ka labwor mitto bwoyo tek pa lee mo wek enek, pye malo igee lee ci kayo obalo Butte woko ki igeye 	when the lion wants to overcome the power of the animal so that it may kill it, it jumps on the back of the animal and severs the two neck tendons
Ka otyeko neno man i waŋ lek, ci oyotoyot wayubbe me cito i Makedonia, kun watamo ni Lubaŋa aye olwoŋowa pi tito lok me kwena maber bot jo kunnu. 	After Paul had seen the vision, we got ready at once to leave for Macedonia, concluding that God had called us to preach the gospel to them.
Wubineno can, wun Luparicayo, pien wumaro kabedo me dito i kacokke, dok wumito ni dano gumotwu i cuk. 	“Woe to you, because you are like unmarked graves, which people walk over without knowing it.”
Ento Lubaŋa miyo kom ki kodi meno kit macalo yam en oyero, kodi acel acel ki kiti kome. 	But God gives it a body as he has determined, and to each kind of seed he gives its own body.
nyany lak palaa ne woko 	blunt the edge of the knife
I kare ducu ka lee makwo-gu gimiyo deyo ki woro ki pwoc bot ŋat ma obedo i wi komker ca, ma bedo kwo nakanaka,, 	Whenever the living creatures give glory, honor and thanks to him who sits on the throne and who lives for ever and ever,
ka pi dyel ci anok kwedde 	as for goats I do not have enough
giŋale, giŋulo laa i kome dok gibipwode ki del, ci gibineke	who will mock him and spit on him, flog him and kill him
gek omakke 	he is having hiccough
Aŋagi ma yam guwinyo dwan Lubaŋa ci gujemo woko-ni? Pe gin lwak dano ducu ma yam gua ki i lobo Ejipt ma kun Moses aye obedo ka telogi? 	Who were they who heard and rebelled? Were they not all those Moses led out of Egypt?
wamitti in icit ka pwony Keyo 	we want you to go to teach at Keyo 
tye ka cacce ki arem matek mada paco labgio yat mo 	he is suffering very much with severe pain without any medicine
ci guweke gucito woko. 	When they heard this, they were amazed
leela ma maloni pa coo, leela ma pem me ongom ma otinggo kicaa, leela pa mon 	the upper bicycle is for men, the bicycle with a bent downwards of the upper support bar is for women
Ka ladit pa askari me ot pa Lubaŋa ki ajwaka madit guwinyo lok meno, ci tamgi ocuŋ woko, kun gipennye kekengi kit ma lokke bitum kwede. 	On hearing this report, the captain of the temple guard and the chief priests were at a loss, wondering what this might lead to.
tee iye me deyo 	make small cutting for decoration of her abdominal wall
wod pa Melea, wod pa Menna, wod pa Matata, wod pa Natan, wod pa Daudi, 	the son of Melea, the son of Menna, the son of Mattatha, the son of Nathan, the son of David,
tic matek labongo cam ma rommo, kello jonynyo ki dano 	hard work without enough food, makes people thin  
dano ducu dong cwinygi yam pi litino me jwikko daggegi ma gubeddo ka claque kwedde i cabit mukatoni 	the people now are very happy for the children to have reduced their shouting here as it was like last week 
jami ma oket i dyee ot ata ni twerro raane 	things which are scattered all over the floor can be collected
nonggo ot 	to find a house
yac pa latin kwan pe ber 	the pregnancy of a student is not good
Pien waŋeyo man, ni, kwowa macon yam giguro kwede kacel i kom yatariya, wek kwo me bal ma onoŋo watye kwede oto woko, wek wan doki pe wadok opii me bal. 	For if we have been united with him in a death like his, we will certainly also be united with him in a resurrection like his.
Aŋeyo gin ma abitimo, ka giryema woko ki i tic me gwoko jami, wek dano gujola i odigi.’ 	So he called him in and asked him, ‘What is this I hear about you? Give an account of your management, because you cannot be manager any longer.’
lyetto ceng tin kec mada  	the sun's heat is too much today 
guyaarre ka lweny 	they got out to fight 
Ento myero iniaŋ man ni, i kare me agikki, piny bibedo marac i kare mogo. 	May the Lord grant that he will find mercy from the Lord on that day! You know very well in how many ways he helped me in Ephesus.
kare ducu ka tye ki yacco ci cwee mada 	every time she is pregnant, she always becomes very fat 
ocitto ka moo 	he went somewhere
onywal gicel keken ci dong okang woko matwal 	she gave birth once and ever since, she is barren
Meno bimiyo wakkewu pira i Kricito. Yecu bedo dwoŋ twatwal, ka dok adwogo botwu. 	Convinced of this, I know that I will remain, and I will continue with all of you for your progress and joy in the faith,
Ento dako ma cware oto ma yenyo yomcwiny me jami mabeco keken, doŋ oto kadi bed pud kwo. 	The widow who is really in need and left all alone puts her hope in God and continues night and day to pray and to ask God for help.
Man en Yecu ma Lubaŋa ocero woko, wan ducu wacaden i kom lok meno. 	God has raised this Jesus to life, and we are all witnesses of it.
Ento wan waye ni wabilarre pi kica pa Rwotwa Yecu, ki gin bene kit meno.” 	No! We believe it is through the grace of our Lord Jesus that we are saved, just as they are.”
nyuka ma rommo litino twerro gedde 	enough porridge for the children can be prepared
kel tok arukki 	bring me the hat so that I wear it
“Dok wuwinyo bene ka yam giwaco ni, ‘Mar lawoti ento ikwer lakworri.’ 	“You have heard that it was said, ‘Love your neighbor and hate your enemy.’
dekke yuggo lem mada 	the food is very tasteful
itye ki nyiŋ me bedo kwo, ento doŋ ito woko. 	I know your deeds; you have a reputation of being alive, but you are dead.
yenynyo daa 	provoking quarrel
wek wacamu, wabed ki yomcwiny	Let’s have a feast and celebrate.
wii latin obutto ni pac pien pe gilyello otum 	the child's hair remained partially shaved because it was not completely done
dano gitye ka gworo bur corongi wek obed malac 	people are widening the pit for their lavatory by digging it 
wek enyut kit ma atir i kare man, ni, en kikome kite atir, dok ekwano dano ni kite atir pi ye Yecu. 	and all are justified freely by his grace through the redemption that came by Christ Jesus.
(Me ada kadi wa i nyim Lubaŋa, lok ducu ma acoyo botwu i waraga man goba pe iye.) 	I saw none of the other apostles—only James, the Lord’s brother.
Ka lwak ma gubedo i kacokke doŋ guket woko, ci lwak Lujudaya ki jo mulokke ma luworo i dini pa Lujudaya bene gulubo kor Paulo ki Barnaba, ci gin gubedo ka lok kwedgi kun gicuko cwinygi ni myero gumedde i kica pa Lubaŋa. 	When the congregation was dismissed, many of the Jews and devout converts to Judaism followed Paul and Barnabas, who talked with them and urged them to continue in the grace of God.
Yecu ogamo doggi ni, “An bene abipenyowu ki peny acel	If you believe, you will receive whatever you ask for in prayer.”
ringo teggo kom dano 	meat strengthens the man's body
Obedo nino adek ma pe neno piny pe camo dok pe mato bene. 	For three days he was blind, and did not eat or drink anything.
Ento in dano adana-ni in aŋa, ma igamo dog Lubaŋa? Gin ma gicweyo acweya twero penyo ŋat mucweye ni, “Piŋo icweya kuman?” 	One of you will say to me: “Then why does God still blame us? For who is able to resist his will?”
wino kinanga giyubbo me arukka i ngut cing ki i gut, pigi teggo mada 	giraffe's hair is made into hair bracelets for wrists and necklace for the neck, and they are very valuable
onoŋo gua ki i kin lyel. Onoŋo giger adada ma ŋat mo pe twero kato ki i yo kenyo. 	When he arrived at the other side in the region of the Gadarenes, two demon-possessed men coming from the tombs met him
Wun wutiyo gin ma wonwu otimo.” Gidok iye bote ni, “Wan pe ginywalowa i abor	Abraham did not do such things.
Pi man Ryeko pa Lubaŋa owaco ni, ‘Abioro botgi lunebi ki lukwena, jo mogo i kingi gibinekogi gibilibogi,’ 	Therefore this generation will be held responsible for the blood of all the prophets that has been shed since the beginning of the world,
pii me lwok tye kwene? 	where is the water for bathing? 
Onoŋo bene aneno buk adola tye i ciŋ ŋat ma obedo i wi komker-ri tuŋ lacuc, ma gicoyo woko ducu ryoryo, tuŋ iye wa ki tuŋ ŋeye bene, dok gimwono ki ginanena abiro. 	Then I saw in the right hand of him who sat on the throne a scroll with writing on both sides and sealed with seven seals.
gin ma apwoyo twatwal ki bot litino en aye ka gitye ka wer 	what I appreciate very much from the children is when they are singing
Pwony ma kit meno a ki bot jo ma luroro ma gin lugoba, ma tam ma i igi ma nyuto botgi balgi odiŋ woko macalo del kom dano ma giwaŋo ki nyonyo malyet. 	The Spirit clearly says that in later times some will abandon the faith and follow deceiving spirits and things taught by demons.
twon kwoo macalo meno lokke twerro tatte 	such a big theft, can be investigated
Pi tyen lok man aye omiyo Lujudaya gumaka i ot pa Lubaŋa, gutemo neka woko. 	That is why some Jews seized me in the temple courts and tried to kill me.
Lacen ka doŋ gutyeko lega ki ri kec, ci guketo ciŋgi i komgi ka gucikogi. 	So after they had fasted and prayed, they placed their hands on them and sent them off.
acekere gitye ka cello bap 	the police are shooting at the target
pe iwiir moo man gwok koni giny kommi 	do not smear your body with this oil, perhaps it might itch your body  might cause itching of your body
tyerro ringo ki rwot	offering  meat to the chief
Kricito pe ocwala ka batija dano, ento ka tito lok me kwena maber ma pe atito ki ryeko mo me lok, wek pe omi to pa Kricito i kom yatariya obed gin ma konnye pe. 	For Christ did not send me to baptize, but to preach the gospel—not with wisdom and eloquence, lest the cross of Christ be emptied of its power.
geg dano pe guwok ki kany 	stop the people from passing here
nen man yat ma apitto oner woko 	see, the tree that I planted has withered away
Onoŋo piny cwir, Yecu onoŋo tye ka wot i ot pa Lubaŋa, i te baraja pa Solomon. 	Why listen to him?”
gin angoo matye ka werro lum kenynyo? oyoo en aye tye ka werro lum 	what is it that is rustling the grass there? a rat is the one that is rustling the grass
dako wotto kun yaarre pien tye ki wodde 	the woman walks with pride because she has a son
tung dyang ogullo 	the horn of the calf has protruded out
Jo-nu gudokke iye ni, “I Beterekem ma i Judaya, pien lanebi yam ocoyo ni, 	“In Bethlehem in Judea,” they replied, “for this is what the prophet has written:
jwaa wii meja maleng 	clean or wipe clean the top of the table
Lamalaika me aŋwenne oonyo gin ma i i atabone woko i kom ceŋ, dok bene giye ni owaŋ dano woko ki mac. 	The fourth angel poured out his bowl on the sun, and the sun was allowed to scorch people with fire.
rweyo dano ka tic, ka dwar nyo ka myel 	going round to asking or inviting people to come to or for work, hunting or dancing
dako man dok lwir mada nen man i mwaka abicel pud onywallo litino aryo keken limmo is igee mwaka adek nyo agwen nia ma nonggo onywal 	this woman does not conceive quickly, look in six years she has given birth to only two children, she conceives three or four years after giving birth
pacowu tye ning ning? 	how is your home? 
Otto tye ka berro lok kwica wiye dong owil woko i kommi 	Otto is talking too much there and has forgotten about you
Pi meno doŋ wua woko ki i kingi, wupokke woko kwedgi, man lok pa Rwot, pe wugud gin mo ma kome ki keni	As God has said: “I will live with them and walk among them, and I will be their God, and they will be my people.”
Jerucalem, Jerucalem, in ma ineko lunebi, ma icelo dano ma gioro boti woko ki got, tyen adi ma nene amito coko litinoni woko, macalo min gweno coko litinone i te bwome, ento wun pe wuye giwu! 	“Jerusalem, Jerusalem, you who kill the prophets and stone those sent to you, how often I have longed to gather your children together, as a hen gathers her chicks under her wings, and you were not willing.
Lujudaya ma guye Yecu ma onoŋo gubino ki Petero guuro mada pien mot me Cwiny Maleŋ doŋ gionyo wa i kom Lurok. 	The circumcised believers who had come with Peter were astonished that the gift of the Holy Spirit had been poured out even on Gentiles.
twil callo dano matye ki twoo aona opiyo 	emaciated like a man who has tuberculosis 
ocekko wangge i komme 	he looked at him with anger and hatred, he directed his anger on him
ngulla mo manok gin ma iwinynyo ni 	please reveal confide to me a bit of the things that you have heard
Ento jo ma lwor, ma pe gin lugen, lutim tim mogo me kwer, lunek dano, lutim abor, lutim tim jokjok, luwor cal jogi, ki jo ducu ma gin lugoba, gibinoŋo mot ma gipoko botgi i nam ma tye ka lyel mac ki gweŋ calfa	But the cowardly, the unbelieving, the vile, the murderers, the sexually immoral, those who practice magic arts, the idolaters and all liars—they will be consigned to the fiery lake of burning sulfur
Kit macalo nene watito botwu, pud dok atittiwu aye ni, ka ce tye ŋatti mo ma dok tye ka tittiwu lok me kwena maber ma pokke woko ki ma yam doŋ wuye-ni, myero gicen woko. 	But even if we or an angel from heaven should preach a gospel other than the one we preached to you, let them be under God’s curse!
takko wii kongo me abila	pouring a small quantity of beer for tasting 
ento ka gunene kun woto i wi nam ki tyene, gutamo ni gwok nyo tipo, 	but when they saw him walking on the lake, they thought he was a ghost
Kit meno bene, cuk cwiny awobe ni myero gugwokke kengi. 	to be self-controlled and pure, to be busy at home, to be kind, and to be subject to their husbands, so that no one will malign the word of God.
mon nywal ki nyek gi	women give birth with the assistance of their o-wives
oc me ic en aye gin marac mada 	aborting is a very bad thing 
nen ka tic me pii i gin anena 	see whether the pouring of water in the flowers is good
wek en ocwal Kricito ma oyero piwu, en Yecu, 	and that he may send the Messiah, who has been appointed for you—even Jesus.
Pire oywek i Jopa ducu, kun jo mapol guye Rwot. 	This became known all over Joppa, and many people believed in the Lord.
An Alupa ki Omega, mukwoŋo ki me agikki, acakki ki agikki.” 	I am the Alpha and the Omega, the First and the Last, the Beginning and the End.
polic tin gugone ki lwak dano ma gujemmo 	the police today fought with many strikers
ikare macon lumony ma Camwuel Beka owotto kwedgi aye ononggo gilwonggo ni muni, ento ma koni walwonggo ni muni ononggo walwonggo ni otara ikare man dong muni en nyig pa jo ma tar keken 	long time ago, the soldiers who were brought by Samuel Baker were called muni, but the ones we now call muni, were called otara now muni is the name ot the whites only
Ka ce pi bal pa dano acel omiyo to obedo ka loc pi dano acel ca en Adam, makatone jo ma gulimo kica mabup, ki mot me nono ma omiyo gikwanogi ni kitgi atir, gibibedo kwo kun noŋo gitye ka loc, pi dano acel-lu bene, en Yecu Kricito. 	Nor can the gift of God be compared with the result of one man’s sin: The judgment followed one sin and brought condemnation, but the gift followed many trespasses and brought justification.
Wuket cwinywu i kom jami ma tye malo i polo ento pe i kom jami me lobo. 	Since, then, you have been raised with Christ, set your hearts on things above, where Christ is, seated at the right hand of God.
cwik nyo cwak ummi 	draw breath in through your nose 
cukari ma tye i gunia man twerro gemme ka wek okwoone maber 	a large amount of sugar can be taken from this bag so that it can be well sewn
cakko alii pe ber ki mon 	starting discord is not right for women
acikari tin gumol kany gkiok tung potto ceng	many soldiers passed through here today on their way to the west
Lupwonnye gupenyo Yecu ni, “Lapwony, man bitimme awene, dok kit gin aŋo ma binyuto ka man doŋ cok timme?” 	“Teacher,” they asked, “when will these things happen? And what will be the sign that they are about to take place?”
En obino pi bedo caden me tito lok i kom ceŋ, wek dano ducu guye pi lokke. 	There was a man sent from God whose name was John.
labbo kweyo woko ki bel 	washing the corn with water to remove the sand from it
pien dano ducu gubalo, pe gio i kom deyo pa Lubaŋa. 	There is no difference between Jew and Gentile,
Ento ka oneno yamo tye ka kodo, ocako doko lwor, onoŋo bene doŋ cako lwiny woko i pii, ci odaŋŋe matek ni, “Rwot, lara do.” 	“Lord, if it’s you,” Peter replied, “tell me to come to you on the water.”
en lagaa dano mada 	she always looks at people through the corner of her eyes
Myero jo me ot pa Icrael ducu guŋe atika ni, Lubaŋa otyeko keto en me bedo Rwot dok Kricito ma Lubaŋa oyere, en Yecu man ma wun wuguro i kom yatariya-ni.” 	“Therefore let all Israel be assured of this: God has made this Jesus, whom you crucified, both Lord and Messiah.”
pol oummo wang cen woko 	the clouds have hiden the sun 
Odero en aye me loggo nyim nyo kal 	Odero is the one which is used for Winnowing simsim or millet
bedo akera orema	I am tired of dependent life or leading a life of pleasiing the powers that be
latinne onweng mada 	the child is emaciated  
ngat mukwogo  	the first person
ento Yecu owaco ni, “Wuwek koko obedi	“Stop wailing,” Jesus said
aa woko ki i wu kom man ibed kwica	get out of this chair and sit there
pik tyen leela  	inflate the bicycle tyre
Ka ŋatti mo openyowu ni, ‘Wugonye piŋo?’ wun wubidok iye kit man ni, ‘Rwot aye mito.’ ” 	If anyone asks you, ‘Why are you untying it?’ say, ‘The Lord needs it.’”
wiye obeddo acuru	his head is pointed at the back
cwerro bao rucu rucu 	planning the board hurriedly, not very well
dwan lakele odig woko mitto atalla ka wek dwanne obed ma longgo 	the sound of the side drum is dull, needs to be heated to make its sound to be very loud 
panne dong apanna ki dano	he avoids people
pe angeyo gin ma en mitto i komma 	I do not know what he wants on me
jug bongone woko 	squeeze the cloth
cwiic pa latin 	sucking of a child 
Awaco lok man pi konyowu, pe me geŋowu ageŋa, ento wek omi gin ducu owot kakare, cwinywu bene obed i kom Rwot, ma gin mo pe ywayo tamwu tero woko cen. 	I am saying this for your own good, not to restrict you, but that you may live in a right way in undivided devotion to the Lord.
Ka doŋ gityeko keto jami ducu i te locce, en Wod kikome bene gibiketo i te loc pa Lubaŋa, wek Lubaŋa doŋ ocok jami ducu i te locce. 	When he has done this, then the Son himself will be made subject to him who put everything under him, so that God may be all in all.
Pi meno, ka iwora, ci jami magi ducu bibedo meri.” 	If you worship me, it will all be yours.”
bao ne yot ni pao pao 	the wood is very light
obinno odiko con 	he came early in the morning
I kare meno, lwak dano alip ki alip gucokke kacel, kun doŋ ginyonne kekengi. Mukwoŋo, Yecu ocako waco bot lupwonnyene ni, “Wugwokke i kom tobi pa Luparicayo, ma en aye buta. 	Meanwhile, when a crowd of many thousands had gathered, so that they were trampling on one another, Jesus began to speak first to his disciples, saying: “Be on your guard against the yeast of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy.
Man otimme wek lok ma yam lanebi oloko ocobbe kakare ni, 	If anyone says anything to you, say that the Lord needs them, and he will send them right away.”
Oryema pe ngeyo makko cal maber 	Oryema does not know how to take pictures 
tyenne twerro rweene 	his leg can be stretched or manipulated
Pi meno wuki, pien pe wuŋeyo nino kadi wa cawa. 	“Therefore keep watch, because you do not know the day or the hour.
man otira ma con dag donggo 	this is an old dwarf who does not want to grow 
Lworo madit omako lwak jo muye Yecu ducu, ki jo ducu ma guwinyo lokke. 	Great fear seized the whole church and all who heard about these events.
Wukel bene wod twon mucwe, wuneki, 	Bring the fattened calf and kill it
moo yaa ma watye ka teddoni tye ka lwar kwee mada 	the shea nut oil which we are boiling is coming very slowly not sufficiently
Ka doŋ gutyeko miyo cadengi, ci lee maca ma okatti ki i bur ma tere pe gik-ki biero lweny i komgi, dok bene nekogi woko. 	Now when they have finished their testimony, the beast that comes up from the Abyss will attack them, and overpower and kill them.
Abedo ki tam ni wun doŋ wutyeko winyo kit ma Lubaŋa omiyo abedo lakan-lim me kicane ki tuŋ botwu, 	For this reason I, Paul, the prisoner of Christ Jesus for the sake of you Gentiles—
nyetto laa 	spitting the spittle 
caddo rig rig ki remo 	has dysentery 
a a a pe gitimmo kitmeno	no, no, no, it is not done like that at all
cit ijak jang yat wek ikel iywee kwedde ki piny kany 	go tear off a branch of a tree and come and with it sweep this place
joo macol temmo gwarro gin ma joo matar gitimmo	the blacks try to copy what the whites do
En otero Petero ki Yakobo ki jon, ci cwinye ocako poto matek ki kumo bene madwoŋ. 	He took Peter, James and John along with him, and he began to be deeply distressed and troubled.
Gin bene gutugi poto i kome, gumake woko cut. 	The men seized Jesus and arrested him.
Ŋat ma tye ki cikka, ma gwokogi, en aye ŋat ma mara	On that day you will realize that I am in my Father, and you are in me, and I am in you.
dano gitye ka ringgo ni pii piri  	people are quickly running away
adomo opotto piny ci otyer woko	adomo fell down and broke
mokko cukari 	eating the powder sugar 
Meno miyo dano ma pe gilirogi, ma gilubo cik, biŋolo kop loyi, pien itye ki cik ma yam doŋ gicoyo woko acoya, dok bene giliri, ento pud ituro cik. 	So then, if those who are not circumcised keep the law’s requirements, will they not be regarded as though they were circumcised?
Nino mukwoŋo i cabit acel acel, dano acel acel i kinwu myero opok lim mogo oket pat, kun lubo kit ma en noŋo kwede, ci okan, wek pe gibed ka joŋo limwu ki ka koma, ma doŋ an ao botwu. 	On the first day of every week, each one of you should set aside a sum of money in keeping with your income, saving it up, so that when I come no collections will have to be made.
agulu opotto piny ni tac ci otoo woko 	the pot fell down heavily and got broken to pieces 
Yecu obino ci owaco botgi ni, “Twero ducu ma i wi polo ki i lobo doŋ gityeko miyo woko bota. 	Then the eleven disciples went to Galilee, to the mountain where Jesus had told them to go.
Pe tye ŋatti mo ma dabo boŋo manyen i kom ginaruka muti. Ka otimo kit meno, ci kiraka ma gidabo kwede-ni telo boŋo meno	“No one sews a patch of unshrunk cloth on an old garment
“Kumeno, Kabaka Agripa, pe akwero winyo cik ma gimiya mua ki i polo, 	“So then, King Agrippa, I was not disobedient to the vision from heaven.
agara en aye tong ma gicubbo kwedde ki lyec	agara is the spear which is used for spearing the elephants
wangge dong nenno piny amuu amuu mada 	he has a blurred vision
Dano acel acel ma timo bal noŋo turo cik, bal aye turo cik. 	Everyone who sins breaks the law; in fact, sin is lawlessness.
maro kadi iter itte pii pe munge	even if you sleep with-in-law under the water, the matter can not be kept secret
Maliam okwanyo moo ma ŋwece kur me wel madwoŋ, moo nard magili, ma romo ratili acel, owiro ki tyen Yecu, ojwayo tyen Yecu ki yer wiye	Martha served, while Lazarus was among those reclining at the table with him.
gwenynyo yil mada 	scabies do cause a lot of itching
gin bkiwoggo i ceng me Baraja 	they will be coming on Monday
gubinno kany i mwaka ma okatto ni 	they came here last year
ocelle ki lakkii 	he stoned him
En mumiyo cakke kombeddi, wan pe waŋeyo dano mo i kit me lobo man	And he died for all, that those who live should no longer live for themselves but for him who died for them and was raised again.
Yecu owacce ni, “Tin lar obino i ot man, pien en bene lakwar Abraim. 	Jesus said to him, “Today salvation has come to this house, because this man, too, is a son of Abraham.
pien Lubaŋa Won oketo lanen mere i kome.” 	Do not work for food that spoils, but for food that endures to eternal life, which the Son of Man will give you
anyira mapol ginenno dano ki gac keken wen lewic makkongi ka nenno dano atir i wanggi 	most of the girls look at the people through the corner of their eyes because they are shy to look straight in the people's eyes 
Ka nino madito doŋ otum, ma gidok paco, latin Yecu odoŋ woko i Jerucalem. Lunyodone onoŋo pe giŋeyo, 	After the festival was over, while his parents were returning home, the boy Jesus stayed behind in Jerusalem, but they were unaware of it.
ento gudiye matek kun giwaco ni, “Bed botwa, pien piny doŋ cok yuto, ceŋ bene doŋ cok poto woko.” Odonyo i ot obedo kwedgi. 	As they approached the village to which they were going, Jesus continued on as if he were going farther.
I kare ma gudiyo Yecu cok pi winyo lok pa Lubaŋa, onoŋo ocuŋ i dog nam Genecaret. 	“He said to him, ‘If they do not listen to Moses and the Prophets, they will not be convinced even if someone rises from the dead.’”
Nen, ibiyac, ibinywalo latin laco, ibicako nyiŋe Yecu. 	You will conceive and give birth to a son, and you are to call him Jesus.
ka gipenynyo lok, tikko jwanno lok ajwanna pe titto lok atir 	when he is asked, he does not give a straight answer but confusing on
lakko dako ma cwarre otoo 	taking over a woman whose husband has died, to be one's wife
Kit meno lamalaika oryeyo ciŋe i lobo ki pala kac, ci ocoko olok ducu me lobo, oonyo woko i bur madit me biyo pig olok me akemo pa Lubaŋa. 	The angel swung his sickle on the earth, gathered its grapes and threw them into the great winepress of God’s wrath.
poor bor pa yatte 	measure the length of the pole 
dege ni bene tika tukke tin tye 	is the aeroplane flying today at all? 
peny ma gipenynye kwede pi gin ma otimme obeddo tek mada 	the questions which he was asked about what happened were very hard
pien oneno can pa aŋecane. 	for he has been mindful of the humble state of his servant
kwonne obeddo nyeme nyeme 	the kwon is not well cooked, still too soft, cannot be shaped for scooping sauce
Yecu olworo waŋe ci owaco bot lupwonnyene ni, “Bibedo tek mada bot jo ma lulonyo me donyo i ker pa Lubaŋa!” 	Jesus looked around and said to his disciples, “How hard it is for the rich to enter the kingdom of God!”
gitye ka royo pul ma ki pokke me amwodda ki welo 	they are firing the unshelled groundnuts for the guests to eat
oyeŋyeŋ meno obedo dit adada. 	No earthquake like it has ever occurred since mankind has been on earth, so tremendous was the quake.
pwony litinno man ki pac 	teach these children carpentry 
tammo me dok gang diki	thinks of going home tomorrow 
tye ka yelle ki lok me piddo ne i kot 	preoccupied with his case in court 
joo ma gupore ducu gucitto i wii polo 	all holy people have gone to heaven 
nyim jim mada ka pe gicoyo maber 	simsim grows close together if not well sown
Gupenye ni, “In doŋ aŋa? In Elia bo?” En odok iye ni, “Pe.” “In lanebi meno?” En ogamo ni, “Pe”. 	He did not fail to confess, but confessed freely, “I am not the Messiah.”
Kono wun jo me lobo, kono lobo omaro wun jone	“If the world hates you, keep in mind that it hated me first.
wek ledde ki nyinge obedi 	stop speaking about him every time 
en tye otiro i ot pa Cimon lanyoŋ pyen i dog nam.’ 	He is a guest in the home of Simon the tanner, who lives by the sea.’
leny yaa man en 	liquefy this shea-butter nuts 
gibibedo ki arem nakanaka dyeceŋ ki dyewor. 	They will be tormented day and night for ever and ever.
piny dong otwoo me moyo 	ground is now dry for putting things on to dry
Ento Pilipo otuc wa i Ajota kun wirre ka tuco lok me kwena maber i gaŋi ducu nio ka obino wa i Cecaria.	Philip, however, appeared at Azotus and traveled about, preaching the gospel in all the towns until he reached Caesarea.
gogogwee gin ma kwoo matye ki bwomme dok tye ki tynne abicel, ma cammo gin mukene ma tuk atukka ki ma lak alakka 	praying mantis is a creature which has wings and six legs, that eats all other insects that fly or crawl
tayi me koleji mewu ni gibecco mada 	your college ties are very beautiful 
ojede cammo lum mape wacce ma ka gunywal i poto kal ci gicammo woko liweng kal ma i poto meno 	the young locusts do eat a lot of grass, therefore, if they hatch in the millet field, they will eat all the millet in the field
Yecu ogamo doggi ni, “Yam atiyo tic acel, wun ducu wuuro. 	Whoever speaks on their own does so to gain personal glory, but he who seeks the glory of the one who sent him is a man of truth; there is nothing false about him.
pe dano ducu ma oa tung kunyango gin Indi, joo mukene Japan mukene Caina, ki mukene mapol 	not all the people who have come from the East are Indians some have come from Japan and others from China and so on 
ringo ma okwok en aye kong gijiyo ka lacen dong gitallo 	rancid meat is the one that is first partially cooked and then later it is smoked
Yecu owacce ni, “Nyara, niyeni ocaŋi	He said to her, “Daughter, your faith has healed you
Ento kare bibino, dok bene doŋ oo, ma ka jo ma woro i ada gibiworo Won i cwiny ki ada, pien Won yenyo jo macalo meno pi wore. 	You Samaritans worship what you do not know; we worship what we do know, for salvation is from the Jews.
lok me pkidone pud dong ojinno woko 	the case in court is very much delayed now
jer pa mony woko ki i wang Iweny 	withdrawing of the army from the front line of fighting 
kun giwacci, “Wamiyo pwocwa boti, in Rwot Lubaŋa Matwero-ducu, in ma itye dok ma yam ibedo tye wa con, pien doŋ imako tekoni madit ci icako loc. 	saying: “We give thanks to you, Lord God Almighty, the One who is and who was, because you have taken your great power and have begun to reign.
awillo dyeggi abic 	I bought five goats
lageddo ot mabecco tye Gulu 	a good contractor is in Gulu
unno dano pe gin maber	to over-use a person is not a good thing
“Wubineno can, wun lupwony-cik ki Luparicayo, wun lugoba! Pien wuwoto wuloŋo piny ki i dye nam kun wuwoto wa i wi tura-gu wek wulok dano acel owek dinine odwog i mewuni, ento ka doŋ olokke, wumiyo doko latin me Geena ma rom aroma kwedwu tyen aryo. 	You yourselves do not enter, nor will you let those enter who are trying to.
ki kec bene bipoto i lobo, ki oyeŋoyeŋ biyeŋo lobo i kabedo mapol	There will be famines and earthquakes in various places.
Ento kombeddi pud koŋ acito i Jerucalem pi tero jami me kony bot jo pa Lubaŋa. 	But now that there is no more place for me to work in these regions, and since I have been longing for many years to visit you,
pot tuba en aye giyubbo doko cigara me amatta ki ma gimatto ki latek, mukene kono ginyammo anyamma ka dong gimunynyo pigge 	dried leaves of tobacco are made into cigarettes which are smoked by themselves or in the pipes and some are chewed and the juice is swallowed
An ki tuŋ bota, kadi ape kunnu, cwinya tye botwu kunnu	For my part, even though I am not physically present, I am with you in spirit
Cutcut dul acel me adek me nam odoko remo, acel me adek me gin makwo ducu ma gibedo i nam guto, ki acel me adek me mel ducu bene guŋinnye woko. 	a third of the living creatures in the sea died, and a third of the ships were destroyed.
Gin ducu guuro ma pe gitwero niaŋ, ma giloko kekengi ni, “Man te lokke aŋo?” 	Amazed and perplexed, they asked one another, “What does this mean?”
pe twerro lokko lok acel nyo aryo ma gwog pud peyea omakko 	he cannot speak a word or two before stammering
Pud bene wuwakke pire! Cwinywu pe myero ocwer, wek giryem ŋat ma otimo kit tim macalo meno woko ki i kinwu? 	And you are proud! Shouldn’t you rather have gone into mourning and have put out of your fellowship the man who has been doing this?
Jo mukene-gu ducu giparo pi gin ma konyogi keken, pe gitamo pi gin ma dok i kom Yecu Kricito. 	I have no one else like him, who will show genuine concern for your welfare.
awobi myerro komme beddo maleng en aye ber 	it is nice for a boy to be clean 
wirro rwot ki moo me ker	to anoint the king with oil of kingship
Ŋat ma pe tuŋ bota, meno noŋo en lakworra, dok ŋat ma pe nywako coko kweda, keto mere aketa. 	“Or again, how can anyone enter a strong man’s house and carry off his possessions unless he first ties up the strong man? Then he can plunder his house.
Meno ducu atiyo pi lok me kwena maber, wek an bene anywak gum mo ma a iye kacel kwedgi. 	I do all this for the sake of the gospel, that I may share in its blessings.
kit macalo doŋ wuniaŋ manoknok, ni, i nino pa Rwotwa Yecu wubiwakke piwa calo wan bene wabiwakke piwu. 	On him we have set our hope that he will continue to deliver us,
ajogamiya en aye ma kobbo two me too wang nyo lokko kom joo beddo agara callo kom gee 	mbwa fly or simulum damnosum is the one that transmits the disease which causes blindness or makes the skin hard like that of an alligator
gin yang gimaarro nekko litino alii mada 	they used to kill children secretly very much 
Dano ma kwoŋo ki ot pa Lubaŋa, noŋo okwoŋo ki ot pa Lubaŋa kadi wa ki ŋat ma bedo iye. 	Therefore, anyone who swears by the altar swears by it and by everything on it.
ka pe ingeyo kwang ci myerro pe icurre i pii pien itwerro muny matwal 	if you do not know how to swim you must not dive into water because you will drown there
opotto i twon logo mo matut mape twerro kwanynye 	he fell into an abyss from where he cannot be lifted out
Ma doŋ onyiko cok ki Jerucalem, i luŋ me got Jeituni, lwak lupwonnyene ducu cwinygi obedo yom, gupako Lubaŋa ki dwan maloŋo pi tic madito ma guneno, 	When he came near the place where the road goes down the Mount of Olives, the whole crowd of disciples began joyfully to praise God in loud voices for all the miracles they had seen:
Kadi bed wutye ki lupwony alip ki alip ma gitelowu i yo pa Kricito, pe wutye ki wego mapol. Yam adoko wonwu i Kricito pi lok me kwena maber. 	Even if you had ten thousand guardians in Christ, you do not have many fathers, for in Christ Jesus I became your father through the gospel.
Gudok iye kit ma Yecu ocikogi kwede, ci guye ni gucit kwede. 	They answered as Jesus had told them to, and the people let them go.
yenynyo lok macon	to search for old stories
tyen Iwango tye iye kwkii ci ka opye i cak ci miyo cak potto woko 	the fly's feet have some germs therefore if it stands or falls in the milk, it will make the milk curdled 
Atye ka paro me nenowu mada, wek apok botwu mot mogo me cwiny me jiŋowu wek wubed matek. 	in my prayers at all times; and I pray that now at last by God’s will the way may be opened for me to come to you.
Ka onoŋe, ci bolo i wi gwoke, kun cwinye yom. 	And when he finds it, he joyfully puts it on his shoulders
dyegi ma guwok kany gunayo lum mada 	the goats which passed here have bent! pushed a side the grass
piki piki tye lakitte aryo, mukwonggo ni meno me ngwec me nino ducu, me aryone ni meno me ngwec tuko 	there are two kinds of motor cycle, the first from the left is for ordinary  running but the second is for sports
tam mot maber pe iruune ka kwerrone 	consider it carefully or ponder over it and don't hurry to reject it 
ngati moni ogwello twon cet kany 	somebody passed a large stool here 
litino cogo nino ducu pigi tek mada ki lunyoddongi  	the last born child is always very important to the parents
omel en aye rec ma wiye dit katto komme woko 	omel is a fish which has a big head than its body
“Wun aye jo ma wubedo ka ŋeta jwijwi i kare ducu ma gibedo ka tema. 	You are those who have stood by me in my trials.
wucit wunu ka wanggo lum ma i nget gang wek obed maleng 	go all of you to burn the grass around the home to make it clean 
guniya kado ne pek mada 	the bag of salt is very heavy
Dok awinyo dwan mo oa ki i polo ma wacci, “Co lok man ni, Cakke kombeddi jo ma to ma noŋo gitye i Rwot tye ki gum.” Cwiny Maleŋ bene omoko lok man kun wacci, “Adada kit meno, doŋ gibiywe ki i tic matek ma yam gubedo ka tiyone, pien ticgi ma yam gutiyo-ni lubo korgi.” 	Then I heard a voice from heaven say, “Write this: Blessed are the dead who die in the Lord from now on.” “Yes,” says the Spirit, “they will rest from their labor, for their deeds will follow them.”
tung pa Okema gi tye kwene?  	where is Okema's home?
Cik man wanoŋo ki bote ni, dano ma maro Lubaŋa myero omar ominne bene.	And he has given us this command: Anyone who loves God must also love their brother and sister.
man aye kit ma acoyo kwede. 	This is how I write.
mac lyel ni tayi 	the fire burns brightly
laker pa jo Bunyoro pe cammo, muranga 	the ruler of Bunyoro does not eat beans
pe ijuur lac i ot 	don't pass a large quantity of urine in the house, wet a bed
Grik yang guloyo lobo mapol mada 	long time ago the Greeks ruled many countries
Cik ma yam gigoro ki nukuta i kom got apaya ma ticce me kelo to, onoŋo obino ki deyo, omiyo neno waŋ Moses oloyo jo Icrael pi nyim Moses muryeny ocaro waŋgi woko, ma ryeny i tur nyime-nu otugi rwenyo woko. 	Such confidence we have through Christ before God.
gititte yoo me nongo lim ento cwinynye pud nwang iye 	he was explained to about the way of getting money but he is still doubtful 
ocubbo lee oluu pien leb tong ononggo oluu 	he unsuccessfully pierced the animal because the edge of the spear was blunt
latin ma ocwiny 	a mature and strong child 
citto ka libbo lee 	going to stalk the animal
Lok man aye mumiyo arumo coŋa i nyim Lubaŋa Won, 	In him and through faith in him we may approach God with freedom and confidence.
Ento atye ki lok me caden ma pire dit makato pa Jon	John was a lamp that burned and gave light, and you chose for a time to enjoy his light.
Kit macalo wun doŋ litino me paco, en aye mumiyo Lubaŋa ocwalo Cwiny Wode i iwa, ma kok ni, “Abba! Wora!” 	to redeem those under the law, that we might receive adoption to sonship.
Nino ducu watiŋo to pa Yecu i komwa, wek kwo pa Yecu bene onen woko ka maleŋ i komwa-ni. 	But we have this treasure in jars of clay to show that this all-surpassing power is from God and not from us.
gitiyo ki pipa makatto me tinggo moo macallo me petero ki me moo tara ki mukene 	a barrel is used very much for carrying petrol and paraffin among others
gugerro otgi madit mada Gulu  	they built a very big house in Gulu
ogamo, ci ocamo i nyimgi. 	They gave him a piece of broiled fish,
okatto ki i wang nak 	it passed through the gap in the teeth(slip of a tongue)
Cakke i kare pa Jon Labatija o kwede wa onyoo ker me polo gilaro ki tek, jo ma gin lutim bwami aye gimayo woko ki tek. 	From the days of John the Baptist until now, the kingdom of heaven has been subjected to violence, and violent people have been raiding it.
Pe kom me cwiny koŋ aye ma kwoŋo bino, ento kom me lobo man, ka doŋ kom me cwiny bino lacen. 	The spiritual did not come first, but the natural, and after that the spiritual.
dano ma geer kom litinone ka guballo gin mo ballogi woko 	a man who is harsh towards his children when they have done something wrong, will spoil them
gin ducu dong gujanynye woko i wii kom pa luditto kama myerro pe gubed iye 	all of them now have sat on the chairs for very important people, the place where they should not sit
gunya wotto nyonno piny ki gee cingge gwinynye bene pe otal calo pa bim 	chimpanzee walks on the back of its closed fingers it has also no callositis on its buttock like that of baboon 
dano ducu guulle gudok tung eel  	all of you move to one side 
Lucepu ki Maliam gurig go woke ki Yecu kakanone i Miciri 	Joseph and Mary ran away into exile with Jesus to Egypt
got nyanynyo lak kweri woko ka Rolm kwede 	the stone will blunt the hoe if you cut it with it
Ka gukato woko ki i mabuc, gucito i ot pa Ludia	After Paul and Silas came out of the prison, they went to Lydia’s house, where they met with the brothers and sisters and encouraged them
Ka lwak guneno gin mutimme, lworo omakogi, ci gumiyo deyo bot Lubaŋa, ma omiyo kit twero macalo meno bot dano. 	Then the man got up and went home.
man wun dong wudille adilla i motoka	you have really packed yourselves in the car
ree kom bao man ki rangi ma atworo 	paint this timber with green colour
Ka Lubaŋa owacci, ‘Abiŋolo kop i kom jo ma giyelogi, ci lacen gibia ki kunnu, ci gibiwora i kabedo man.’ 	But I will punish the nation they serve as slaves,’ God said, ‘and afterward they will come out of that country and worship me in this place.’
Gwok gin maber ma gimiyo i ci?i pi teko pa Cwiny Maleŋ ma bedo i iwa. 	What you heard from me, keep as the pattern of sound teaching, with faith and love in Christ Jesus.
I kare ma doŋ gicok o i Jerucalem, ki tuŋ Betepage ki Betania, i kor got Jeituni, ci Yecu ocako oro jo aryo ki i kin lupwonnyene, 	As they approached Jerusalem and came to Bethphage and Bethany at the Mount of Olives, Jesus sent two of his disciples,
labolo ojwir woko 	the banana has become stunted 
Yucepu okwanyo kom Yecu, ci oboyo woko ki boŋo camanini maleŋ-ŋe, 	Going to Pilate, he asked for Jesus’ body, and Pilate ordered that it be given to him.
oyoo laworro omokko i layuta ma giterro i ot 	yesterday a rat was caught in the trap that was set in the house
litino tin gitye ki kec pien gukwerro woko cammo alot 	the children are still hungry because they refused to eat sauce without simsim paste in it
Yecu oa ki i lobo ma cokcok ki Turo, ci owok ki i cidon, ka okato ocito wa i nam Galilaya, ka otuc kwede wa i dye lobo Dekapoli. 	Then Jesus left the vicinity of Tyre and went through Sidon, down to the Sea of Galilee and into the region of the Decapolis.
Ento koŋ doŋ wupo i kare mukato, kit ma yam wuciro kwede, kun wulwenyo ki lwak cam madwoŋ, i kare ma doŋ ceŋ pa Lubaŋa otyeko ryeny omenyowu. 	Remember those earlier days after you had received the light, when you endured in a great conflict full of suffering.
Ento Petero owacce ni, “Anania, piŋo Catan opoŋo cwinyi, omiyo itemo bwolo Cwiny Maleŋ kun ikano dul lim ma oa i loboni? 	Then Peter said, “Ananias, how is it that Satan has so filled your heart that you have lied to the Holy Spirit and have kept for yourself some of the money you received for the land?
piny tin dyewor obutto mel 	it did not rain last night 
otung ki cam 	he was choked with food
Ka jo kunnu gutyeko kwano, ci cwinygi obedo yom i kom lok ma gicoyo iye me cuko cwinygi. 	The people read it and were glad for its encouraging message.
komme myel  	he is trembling from fear or excitement
rub kin awobe caa ma giwakke twatwalli	disturb the boys there who are very proud
tong gweno ka giteddo ci latunynye beddo tunynyo tunynyo 	when an egg is boiled its yolk becomes softish and loosely coherent
pe iget iye ki lok marac macalo kitmeno	do not provoke him with such bad words
dano ducu myerro gugee jwaano waar 	all the people should know how to polish shoes
gucitto ka tukko ngwec 	they went for running race game 
miine cente ma ka bongo  	give him money instead of clothes
dako man dong tye ki twon alugo lugo mo madit mada i gutte mitto ayangga	this woman has a very large goitre in her neck, it requires to be operated upon
Odok ki gin ni, “Wubin, wunen.” Gubino, guneno ka ma en onoŋo bedo iye	Turning around, Jesus saw them following and asked, “What do you want?” They said, “Rabbi” (which means “Teacher”), “where are you staying?”
ka oballo gin mo ci gitwerro pwodde 	if he has spoilt anything, he can be caned 
an pe abino me kelo kuc, ento pala lucwan. 	I did not come to bring peace, but a sword.
Ento ma ka meno, wuket cwinywu i kom kerre, ci jami magi ducu gibimedo botwu. 	But seek his kingdom, and these things will be given to you as well.
Ka doŋ waraga man gityeko kwanone i kinwu, myero wumi gikwan bene bot jo muye Kricito ma gitye i Laodikia, ki wun bene myero wukwan waraga ma jo Laodikia gicwalo botwu. 	Give my greetings to the brothers and sisters at Laodicea, and to Nympha and the church in her house.
I panggo wii mutokane woko wekko yoo ma atir 	turns turning off his car from the straight road
twoo aona opiyo twillo kom dano marac twatwa 	tuberculosis makes a person's body very much emaciated
piyo lawotti me matto taa	to persuade your friend to smoke
jwet ngwec i rig woko 	take off and run away fast 
cit ka nyeddo lok ki jo ma gitamoni gkiitto twatwal 	go and talk sarcastically to those who think that they are very important people
cam ngoo woko ki i dongge ka tye ka cam 	he feels sick when eating
papal ne twerro pwonne 	the pawpaw can be plucked 
onyommo nyako aduno mo ma kitte ber mada	married a middle sized, roundish woman who has very good manner and character
ocweyo adukone ragaraga 	he made a rough basket, or a coarse basket
i yoo 	on the road 
en gon 	he is well bred 
Dok Lubaŋa ma ŋeyo cwiny dano ducu obedo cadengi pi miyogi cwiny Maleŋ macalo yam omiyo botwa. 	God, who knows the heart, showed that he accepted them by giving the Holy Spirit to them, just as he did to us.
lye opikke 	he has a big abdomen
Gucako bedo ki pyem i kingi kekengi, kun gipyem ni, “Ka koni wawacci, ‘Twerone oa ki bot Lubaŋa’, ci en dok bipenyowa ni, ‘Ci piŋo pe wuye lokke?’ 	They discussed it among themselves and said, “If we say, ‘From heaven,’ he will ask, ‘Then why didn’t you believe him?’
biyo lemun me amatta 	to squeeze lemon for drinking
gin me myenno kwon dong pe pien oluta kwon otuur woko 	there is nothing for stirring the kwon because the special mingling stick for stirring has got broken
par mada pi lok ma gitito i kanica 	ponder and meditate seriously about what was preached in the church today 
tenno canduk ki kidi ma oketto i teere	to support the box with a stone which is placed underneath
yang con laten wic pa ludito ononggo dui yat 	a long time ago the support (pillow) of the elders' heads were pieces of wood
tin cabit me abiro me yweyo mewa	today is the seventh week of our holidays
gak lapena man koni me attedda 	grind coarsely these pigeon peas for cooking later
goddo iye ka nyutoni cam pee i iye   	contracting his abdomen to show that his stomach is empty
kel wunu tal me bullo ringo 	bring sticks for grilling the meat 
nyuka ongoo woko 	the milk becomes watery, that is, it curdled, if you do not put it into a refridgerator,
Dok wun wego, pe wuket kolo i kom litinowu ma miyo kiniga makogi, ento wupitgi gudoŋ maber kun wupwonyogi dok wunyebogi ki kit mabeco ma Rwot pwoyo. 	“so that it may go well with you and that you may enjoy long life on the earth.”
pokko dyel macol kom matar	to separate black goats from the white ones
Me agikkine, utmegiwa, wuleg Lubaŋa piwa, wek lok pa Rwot owinnye oywek woko oyotoyot, dano guket iye deyo macalo bene otimme i kinwu, 	As for other matters, brothers and sisters, pray for us that the message of the Lord may spread rapidly and be honored, just as it was with you.
lateke teke tidi dok katto lakaibona ento ka tuk ci bwomme kok 	a male grasshopper (lateke teke) is smaller than the female ones but its wings make noise when it is flying
kweri lagot purro maber katto kweri orok 	the Langis do not cultivate with an L-shaped shaft hoes 
pe myero iyet ngati mo 	do not abuse or insult anybody
Ka doŋ ginywalo Yecu i Beterekem ma i Judaya i kare me loc pa kabaka Kerode, nen, luryeko mogo ma gua yo tuŋ wokceŋ gubino i Jerucalem, kun gipenyo ni, 	After Jesus was born in Bethlehem in Judea, during the time of King Herod, Magi from the east came to Jerusalem
dano ma twerro poo oyot oyot inenno ki kit lokke ki timme ne 	a man who can go quickly mad is seen by the way of his talk and behaviour
can opoi i komme matek 	great misfortune upon him 
laa otwoo oteng woko 	the hide dried and became stiff 
pyem wang oo	he brags around the evening fireplace
yab redio wek olyet ot ki lok ma gilokko nyo wer ma giwerro iye mape dong ot obeddo ma olig aligga ni tik 	switch on the radio to warm the house with the talks and songs that come from it instead ot the silence
Ento Petero ogamo, ocako tito botgi ki kore kun wacci, 	Starting from the beginning, Peter told them the whole story:
pamba en aye yat ma donggo ma ceggo cego ma nyak nyingge ma gin matar ma yom ma obeddo callo yer ma walwonggo ni yecce en aye gicweyo doko bongo 	cotton is a plant which grows to a short height and produces seeds that are surrounded by white soft wool and it is this wool which is spun into threads to make fabrics for clothes
Macalo iora i lobo, an bene aorogi i lobo. 	Sanctify them by the truth; your word is truth.
Anyira ca ducu gua cut, ci guyubo taragi. 	“Then all the virgins woke up and trimmed their lamps.
bit pul ma i atabo ityek woko 	shell all the groundnuts in the bowl
Ento Yecu olwoŋogi bote, ci owacci, “Wun wuŋeyo ni, jo ma gilwoŋogi ni gin lulo Lurok giloyo dano ki tek, dok luditogi bene gibedo ki twero i komgi. 	Jesus called them together and said, “You know that the rulers of the Gentiles lord it over them, and their high officials exercise authority over them.
I panggo wii mutokane woko wekko yoo ma atir 	turns turning off his car from the straight road
ceerro kaal ma gimoyo wek otwoo 	he is stirring the animals from under the grass so that they may come out
wang latinni dok opong ki ature twatwal 	this child's eyes are full of whitish discharge
willo kawa 	buying coffee
En openyo pi got coc, ci ocoyo ni, “Nyiŋe Jon.” Gin ducu guuro. 	He asked for a writing tablet, and to everyone’s astonishment he wrote, “His name is John.”
Ka Pilato owinyo lok man openyo ka gwok nyo Yecu Lagalilaya. 	On hearing this, Pilate asked if the man was a Galilean.
ngayo latwoo i wii kitanda 	to place the patient, with the face upwards 
danone maarro punno dano mada 	the man loves very much cheating people
bur matye i tyen kello kwot pa agul gul ma i kincek 	ulcers on the foot causes the lymph nodes in the groin to swell and become painful
Latin man dong konynye onyee i dye ot kany 	the child is defaecating every where in the house, and the house is almost covered with its faeces
mwarro kwon madit 	cutting off a great portion of millet bread leaving a small portion 
latinni tye ka pongge mere nono ni pe emitto cam kun kono mitto 	this child is pretending that he does not want to eat and yet he wants
Abanya tin odok tunggi	Abanya's mother returned to their home today
Ka ajwaka madit openye ni, “Lok tye kit meno?” 	Then the high priest asked Stephen, “Are these charges true?”
opotto li ngacaka 	he fell down flat with his arms and legs lying anyhow
ocitto lajwac 	twisting the rope loosely 
Yecu obolo botgi carolok. Owacci, “Latowaŋ twero peyo latowaŋ lawote Gin aryo ducu pe gibipoto woko i bur? 	He also told them this parable: “Can the blind lead the blind? Will they not both fall into a pit?
piir lok me makke 	plan to arrest him 
Yecu ociko jo ducu ni gubed piny i dul ki dul, i kom lum alita. 	Then Jesus directed them to have all the people sit down in groups on the green grass.
gitye ka gerro dyekal 	they are cleaning away the grass from the compound by digging
dako man tika twerro cunne? 	can this woman be seduced?
“Ento ka wuneno mony orumo Jerucalem, ci wuŋe ni kare me ketone doŋ onyiko cok. 	“When you see Jerusalem being surrounded by armies, you will know that its desolation is near.
dano ducu ma ginywale ki Cwiny tye kameno.” 	You hear its sound, but you cannot tell where it comes from or where it is going
pe ber ka itye ka pitto pamba me pikko gi kacel twatwal 	it is not good to plant the cotton closely
Wumot bene jo muye Kricito ma gicokke i otgi. Wumot larema Epaenato	Not only I but all the churches of the Gentiles are grateful to them.
piir lok i kom ngati mo 	planning against somebody 
ngaa ma bicammo wang ker pa wonne? 	who will be the successor or heir to his father's kingship? 
titte wek gigeyi ni in angaa 	say who or what you are so that the people may know you 
lacooni dong opoo woko 	the man has become mad
pire omiyo wan jo ma waye Yecu walimo tekcwiny, pien oyabo botwa yo me o i nyim Lubaŋa ki gen. 	His intent was that now, through the church, the manifold wisdom of God should be made known to the rulers and authorities in the heavenly realms,
mon myerro pe gibeddo ma gukarre akarra  	women must not sit with their legs astride
Pe dok wacal ki Moses ma yam oumo waŋe ki boŋo, wek jo Icrael pe gunen kit ma ryeny mucaro waŋgi-ni tye ka rwenyo woko kwede i tur nyime, ci otum woko. 	Therefore, since we have such a hope, we are very bold.
Ento lacen ka doŋ acer woko ci abitelo nyimwu me cito i Galilaya.” 	But after I have risen, I will go ahead of you into Galilee.”
Ka Yecu doŋ oloko man, ocito kacel ki lupwonnyene, guŋolo nota me Kidron, ka ma onoŋo tye iye poto	But these are written that you may believe that Jesus is the Messiah, the Son of God, and that by believing you may have life in his name.
Cutcut lamalaika otiŋa otera i tim, kun onoŋo Cwiny Maleŋ oyuto tamma woko, ci aneno dako mo ma obedo i wi lee mo makwar, ma gicoyo nyiŋ mogo i kom lee-nu ma nyuto cac i kom Lubaŋa	Then the angel carried me away in the Spirit into a wilderness
en tye ki ruc matek mada i kom luticce 	he is very strict with hurrying his workers
Ci lupwonnyene gupenye ni, “Piŋo lupwony-cik giwacci, Elia aye koŋ kwoŋo bino?” 	As they were coming down the mountain, Jesus instructed them, “Don’t tell anyone what you have seen, until the Son of Man has been raised from the dead.”
kot ma ocweer matekki onayo geya woko liweng ki i poto 	the heavy rain that took place has pushed down all the sorghum in the field 
dano tye ka mol 	people are passing by in large numbers or multitude of people are passing by 
omiine, onyuny ringo mo 	he gave him a very small piece of meat
Dano ma onoŋo gutelo nyim Yecu gujuke ni, “Liŋ, nye;” ento en omedde ameda ki daŋŋe ni, “Lakwar Daudi, tima kica!” 	Those who led the way rebuked him and told him to be quiet, but he shouted all the more, “Son of David, have mercy on me!”
yello lu mabuc pe ber	to molest the prisoners is not good
Kato (Paska) pa Lujudaya onoŋo doŋ tye cok, omiyo Yecu ocito malo i Jerucalem. 	There they stayed for a few days.
beddo ki larem ber mada pien twerro konynyi i kare mo ma nonggo itye marac mada labongo gin mo 	to have a friend is very good because he can help you at a time when you are badly off and have nothing at all
ngido ngido mungati en aye dong odong 	only crumbs or pieces of broken bread which is remaining 
I kare ma en tye i Mileto ci ocwalo kwena i Epeco pi lwoŋo ludoŋo pa lwak muye Kricito gubin bote. 	From Miletus, Paul sent to Ephesus for the elders of the church.
citto ka rukko bongo	to go to put on a dress 
tye ka wot rabbo nget bar caa 	he is walking round the field there
pok cam 	distribute the food
owacci, “Ludito, aneno ni wotwa-ni bibedo rac ci kelo lannye me jami mapol, pe me yec ma gitiŋo i mel keken, ento wa mel kikome kadi wa kwowa bene.” 	“Men, I can see that our voyage is going to be disastrous and bring great loss to ship and cargo, and to our own lives also.”
nyako ma wang mine oto myelo neno ceng	a girl whose mother is blind, dances and looks at the sun
ruyo lok 	talking too fast
can geggi beddo ki jan ma myerro ibed kweddgi	poverty prevents you from having essential things which you should have
Ka gutimo meno, noŋo gukano mono maber pigi kengi pi kare me anyim, wek gumak kwo ma en aye kwo kikome. 	Command them to do good, to be rich in good deeds, and to be generous and willing to share.
oorogi ka tito lok i kom ker pa Lubaŋa ki ka caŋo lutwo. 	and he sent them out to proclaim the kingdom of God and to heal the sick.
anyeeri rac mada ki kal pien gimaarro kal ma pad gitinno ni mada 	the edible rats are a menace to the millet because they like the growing millet very much
I kare macon mon ma lucan gikwoo ki cam agweer	in the past poor women live on grain left over in the fields, after the owners have harvested, which they go and harvest
lee mapol magi bit mada gigukko twarre woko ki ngwec ma nonggo pud peya wunyikko cok botgi pien noggo dong gugweyowu woko 	many animals have a very sharp sense of smell, they start to run away before you come close to them because they will have smelled you already
pim remone ka maleriya tye iye ' 	examine the blood to find out if there are malaria parasites in it
burac lajwa waar the kwene? 	where is the cloth for polishing the plates?
wiye pek  	his head is heavy, 
tye ka lyerre ni pe emitto 	he is pretending or disdaining that he does not want
Dano dok bimiyo kit gin aŋo ma ka kwone? 	Or what can anyone give in exchange for their soul?
Pien ot mo keken dano aye ma gero, ento ŋat ma gero jami ducu en aye Lubaŋa. 	For every house is built by someone, but God is the builder of everything.
Ci Yecu owacce ni, “Nyik icit cen, Catan, pien yam gicoyo ni, ‘Wor Rwot Lubaŋani, dok bene iti pire keken.’ ” 	Jesus said to him, “Away from me, Satan! For it is written: ‘Worship the Lord your God, and serve him only.’”
tye ka lok lworro lworro, pe lokko atiir i kom gin ma myerro olok iye 	he is speaking not straight but round the matter upon which he should speak 
genno ni pe ibititto ki nngati mo gin ma etitti 	trusting that you will not tell anybody what he confided in you
ngin wii kidi reggo nyim ki lagin	clean the grinding stone surface for grinding simsim by rolling the simsim dreg on it
Kabaka okumo matek, ento pi kwoŋŋe ki pi welone omiyo pe omito twonne. 	The king was greatly distressed, but because of his oaths and his dinner guests, he did not want to refuse her.
latinne lapele mada ma ka iwekko i ot kene ci inongo oketto jami woko atata i ot 	the child is very restless if you left him in the house alone, you would find that he has scattered things all over in the house 
Utmego ma i Licitra ki Ikonio giloko ki nyiŋ Temceo maber. 	The believers at Lystra and Iconium spoke well of him.
Tic mo keken ma wutiyo, wuti maber ki cwinywu ducu, macalo wutiyo bot Rwot, ento pe pi dano. 	Slaves, obey your earthly masters in everything; and do it, not only when their eye is on you and to curry their favor, but with sincerity of heart and reverence for the Lord.
litino man wiigi pil mada i kom dano 	these children are very arrogant to people 
gin ducu ononggo gimitto cammo lawang acel mape dok gipokko caa me cam ma pat pat 	they all want to eat at once together without separating the times for eating 
Wuleg piwa bene, wek Lubaŋa oyab botwa doggola me tito lok, wek watuc muŋ pa Kricito, pien pi lok meno aye omiyo koni atye i buc kany, 	Devote yourselves to prayer, being watchful and thankful.
Atye ki gen me neni oyot, ka wek doŋ wabilok waŋ ki waŋ. 	I have much to write you, but I do not want to do so with pen and ink.
tye kit mucumeni mapol ma pat pat 	there are many varieties of saws 
Jo pa Lubaŋa ducu gumotowu, makatone jo me ot pa Cecar. 	And my God will meet all your needs according to the riches of his glory in Christ Jesus.
gerro otte twerre 	the house can be constructed
Pien an atidi twatal i kin lukwena ducu, ma onoŋo pe porre me lwoŋa ni an lakwena, pien yam aketo can i kom jo pa Lubaŋa muye Kricito. 	For I am the least of the apostles and do not even deserve to be called an apostle, because I persecuted the church of God.
kadi bed yam waŋeyo Kricito i kit me lobo, pe dok waŋeye kit meno. 	So from now on we regard no one from a worldly point of view
piki piki man dong mitto acatta pien dong otii woko 	this motorcycle now needs to be sold because it is too old 
Wun litino, wuwiny lunyodowu i Rwot, pien meno aye ber. 	to him be glory in the church and in Christ Jesus throughout all generations, for ever and ever! Amen.
Pi lok man, i kare ma Kricito obino i lobo, en oloko ni, “In giri pe imito gitum kadi gityer, ento iketo koma tye. 	Therefore, when Christ came into the world, he said: “Sacrifice and offering you did not desire, but a body you prepared for me;
Kadi pi ŋat ma kite atir, bedo tek twatwal bot dano mo me to pire. Gwok nyo ka obedo dano ma kite ber, ŋat mo twero diyo cwinye me to pire. 	You see, at just the right time, when we were still powerless, Christ died for the ungodly.
kongo ocek ma bedi jibi-jibi 	the beer is now mature and foaming or bubbling freely
rye ciŋi, iket i lakŋeta	Then he said to Thomas, “Put your finger here; see my hands
Wek lutim maraco koŋ gumedde ki timo gin marac jo ma cilo me bal obwoyogi gumedde ki bedo ki bal, ki jo ma kitgi atir myero gumedde ki timo gin ma tye atir, ki jo maleŋ bene myero pud gumedde ki bedo leŋ.” 	Let the one who does wrong continue to do wrong; let the vile person continue to be vile; let the one who does right continue to do right; and let the holy person continue to be holy.”
dako mo ma lakke lakerre tin odaa mada ki cwarre 	a woman with a gap in her teeth, today quarrelled very much with her husband
gupillo wii awobe ma guloyo mupira ki kijira 	they welcomed the boys who were victorious in the football match with ululation of joy
pray pii pe mol dok teere 	lit the water does not flow back where it came from the meaning is that you cannot become young again but you continue to go old
beddo latel wii dano gin matek mada 	being a leader of the people is a very difficult thing
obayo kikopo woko	he threw away the cup or he threw out the cup
jonni tin lwenynyo pingoo?  	what are they fighting for today?
ber mape wacce 	very good indeed, excellent
Abiporo yalwak me kare man ki gin aŋoŋ Girom ki litino ma bedo i cuk ma gilwoŋo litino wadigi kun giwacci, 	“To what can I compare this generation? They are like children sitting in the marketplaces and calling out to others:
Pien yam owaco bot Moses ni, “Abitimo kica bot ŋat ma abitimo kica bote, dok bene abinyuto berra bot ŋat ma abinyuto berra bote.” 	What then shall we say? Is God unjust? Not at all!
Ka ce ŋat mo olonnye kekene, kun oweko bedo ki kit marac woko, en bibedo atabo ma gitiyo kwede i kare me deyo, ma bedo maleŋ, ma konyo won ot, ma oyubbe pi tic ducu maber. 	Nevertheless, God’s solid foundation stands firm, sealed with this inscription: “The Lord knows those who are his,” and, “Everyone who confesses the name of the Lord must turn away from wickedness.”
“Ka mwaka okato pyeraŋwen, ci lamalaika onen bote i tim ma i ŋet got Cinai i leb mac ma lyel i caka. 	“After forty years had passed, an angel appeared to Moses in the flames of a burning bush in the desert near Mount Sinai.
ci ŋat mo i kinwu waco botgi ni, “Wucit ki kuc, komwu obed momor, wuyeŋ,” kun pe wumiyo botgi gin mo ma mitte pi pito kom, ci meno konyo aŋo? 	If one of you says to them, “Go in peace; keep warm and well fed,” but does nothing about their physical needs, what good is it?
pimmo lee ki luduko me acella	to aim at animals with the gun for shooting
ento gicwala woko ki aduku madit kun gimiyo akato ki i waŋ dirica ma i kom cel, ci omiyo abwot woko ki i ciŋe.	In Damascus the governor under King Aretas had the city of the Damascenes guarded in order to arrest me.
gin ma giyubbo me jwayo lak 	where is the brush for polishing the shoes? 
pido banya 	asking for the debt to be paid
lokke tye ka gunynye ki kwica matek mada 	the matter is becoming serious over there 
ento jo ma luryeko gutero moo i cupa kacel ki taragi. 	The wise ones, however, took oil in jars along with their lamps.
okeng citto ki luwotte 	he missed going with his friends
mukeka ne lac ni taam 	the mat is very wide and broad 
Ento larib dano pe mitte pi ŋat acel keken, ento Lubaŋa aye tye acel. 	For if the inheritance depends on the law, then it no longer depends on the promise; but God in his grace gave it to Abraham through a promise.
yamo taggo yeya 	the wind moves the canoe up and down the water
waraga pa Paulo bot Lukolinti 	the letter ot Paul to the Corinthians
Gumito make, ento pe tye ŋat mo ma oketo ciŋe i kome, pien karene peya oromo. 	but I know him because I am from him and he sent me.”
twom pii ci ikel kany 	draw the water and bring it here
ento Yecu ceŋ pe owaco ni en pe bito, ento ni, “Ka amito ni en ori nio ka abidwogo, ilaro aŋo iye?” 	Because of this, the rumor spread among the believers that this disciple would not die
Doki Won ma ceŋ oora en kikome obedo cadenna. 	For the works that the Father has given me to finish—the very works that I am doing—testify that the Father has sent me.
komme pwac woko ka ojwayo ki amor matek 	his skin is lacerated or bruised if he rubs it hard with a sponge 
I nino mukwoŋo me cabit, Maliam Lamagdala opuk i lyel odiko con ma piny pud col oneno ni gikwanyo got woko ki i dog lyel. 	He then added, “Very truly I tell you, you will see ‘heaven open, and the angels of God ascending and descending on’ the Son of Man.”
kel gweni adek	bring three chicken
akwerro titto mange woko	I refused telling the secret
gitye ka maddo wang bur 	they are swabbing the ulcers 
“Rwotwa ki Lubaŋawa, in imyero me noŋo deyo ki woro ki teko, pien in aye ma yam iketo jami ducu, dok bene pi mitti omiyo gubedo tye, meno aye gin mumiyo yam giketogi.”	“You are worthy, our Lord and God, to receive glory and honor and power, for you created all things, and by your will they were created and have their being.”
Ka wudiyo cwinywu, ci wubilaro kwowu. 	Stand firm, and you will win life.
Pi meno, pe wuribbe kwedgi. 	Let no one deceive you with empty words, for because of such things God’s wrath comes on those who are disobedient.
Ento Yecu odok iye ni, “Wun wurwenyo, pien pe wuŋeyo gin ma gicoyo i ginacoya, kadi wa teko pa Lubaŋa bene wukwiya. 	Now then, at the resurrection, whose wife will she be of the seven, since all of them were married to her?”
dano gudurre lipim i bar odilo 	the people gathered in large numbers in the football field 
Pien onoŋo lupwonnyene gucito i gaŋ ka wilo cam. 	When a Samaritan woman came to draw water, Jesus said to her, “Will you give me a drink?”
In iŋeyo ni, jo ducu ma tye i Acia do? guloko ŋegi woko bota. Pugelo gin ki Kermogen gitye i kingi. 	Guard the good deposit that was entrusted to you—guard it with the help of the Holy Spirit who lives in us.
dano gitye ka torre i ot lukiko 	people are assembling in the court room 
Wugwokke kenwu	So watch yourselves
pi willo conge woko omiyo pe dong ocitto 	because of straining his knee, he did not go
i kin gi tye lye akeca matek mada 	there is great hatred between them
Dako owacce ni, “Ladit, aneno in giri lanebi. 	What you have just said is quite true.”
alimo cik man ki bot Wora.” 	I have authority to lay it down and authority to take it up again
I kare ma gitye ka wot, jo mogo ki i kin lukur-piny gudok i gaŋ ka dwoko lok bot ajwagi madito pa Lubaŋa pi gin ducu ma doŋ otimme-ni. 	Go and tell my brothers to go to Galilee; there they will see me.”
“Ento dano ma miyo ŋat acel ma i kin jo magi matino ma guye an-ni poto i bal, onoŋo bedo ber makato ducu ka gitweyo kidi rego madit i ŋute ci gibole kwede woko wa i nam matut. 	“If anyone causes one of these little ones—those who believe in me—to stumble, it would be better for them to have a large millstone hung around their neck and to be drowned in the depths of the sea.
I kare ma guwinyo lokke guuro matek	and he asked them, “Whose image is this? And whose inscription?”
latinne calle dok pat pe callo wonne 	the child's resemblance is different 
joo macol temmo gwarro gin ma joo matar gitimmo	the blacks try to imitate what the whites do
dogge bedi tweg-tweg 	speaking non-stop without reasoning (usually in quarrelling)
um pe ngweyo cet	the nose can not smell excreta
En otimo aranyi i kom jo me rokwa, ci oruyo kwarowa ni myero gubol litinogi woko wek pe gubed makwo. 	He dealt treacherously with our people and oppressed our ancestors by forcing them to throw out their newborn babies so that they would die.
mal ringo man oyot oyot 	fry this meat quickly 
dong ogikko woko timme callo latin  	he has stopped behaving like a child
Owacce ni, “A, icit giri, niyeni ocaŋi.” 	Then he said to him, “Rise and go; your faith has made you well.”
yakko dano pe gin maber  	robbing people is not a good thing
Guwacce ni, “Jo mogo giwacci Jon Labatija, jo mukene giwacci Elia, ki jo mogo giwacci Jeremia nyo ŋat mo acel i kin lunebi.” 	They replied, “Some say John the Baptist; others say Elijah; and still others, Jeremiah or one of the prophets.”
en bene mitto citto 	he too wants to go
pien Rwot biŋolo kop i wi lobo bicobo bene woko oyotoyot.” 	and, “In the very place where it was said to them, ‘You are not my people,’ there they will be called ‘children of the living God.’”
cat jami ducu ma itye kwede, mi limme ki lucan, ci ibibedo ki lwak lonyo ma gikano piri i polo	Sell everything you have and give to the poor, and you will have treasure in heaven
Lacen wan wadonyo i mel, ci gin gudok paco. 	After saying goodbye to each other, we went aboard the ship, and they returned home.
Ento man otimme wek lok ma gicoyo i cik megi ocobbe kakare, ni, ‘Gikwera nono.’ 	Whoever hates me hates my Father as well.
moono lok mung pa lawotti pe ber  	to divulge divulging the secrets of your friend is very bad
nyelo en ngat acel i kom kaka me twol ci en dit mada, goyo lee ci dine i komme matek nio wang ma otoo ka dong cakko munynyo ne 	the python belongs to the snake family but it is very big, it strikes down an, animal and then winds tightly round it, until it is dead and then swallows it
dano ma komme gwaa 	a man with a rough skin 
obeddo ka wirro lakodi moo moni ci obokko komme woko 	she has been dyeing with a certain oil on her body and has turned her body brown  
gitweyo pi wol	she was jailed for poisoning
Ci dano mo acel owacce ni, “Nen, meni ki omegini gitye gucuŋ woko gimito lok kwedi.” 	While Jesus was still talking to the crowd, his mother and brothers stood outside, wanting to speak to him.
wekko citto 	letting him go
Ka dano dumo leb mapatpat, myero gubed gin aryo nyo adek, pe okat wel ennu-ni, kun gileyo aleya, ma ŋat mo gonyo te lokke. 	If anyone speaks in a tongue, two—or at the most three—should speak, one at a time, and someone must interpret.
Oyubo lok kwedgi ni ebiculogi i wel lim ma mitte pi nino acel acel macalo kite tye, ci ocwalogi i poto olokke. 	He agreed to pay them a denarius for the day and sent them into his vineyard.
I kare ma Yecu doŋ otyeko loko lok magi ducu, lwak guuro kit pwonnye matek, 	But everyone who hears these words of mine and does not put them into practice is like a foolish man who built his house on sand.
nyub cak ki kwon 	mix milk with kwon 
Imito ni pe ibed ki lworo i kom dano ma tye ka loc? Ti gin maber, ci en bipwoyi	For rulers hold no terror for those who do right, but for those who do wrong
latin obeddo orada caa 	the child is there with an empty stomach, he is hungry
Gubolo kwir pigi, ci kwir opoto i kom Matiya, ka giketo en i kom wel lukwena apar wiye acel-li.	Then they cast lots, and the lot fell to Matthias; so he was added to the eleven apostles.
Doŋ koni, Abana, ket deyo i koma i nyimi, ki deyo ma yam abedo kwede i nyimi ma peya iketo lobo. 	I have brought you glory on earth by finishing the work you gave me to do.
guur ma gitwoyo atwoya i ceng mit mada me acamma 	the sundried Nile perch is very tasty
gitye ka nyeerre ken gi 	they are laughing at themselves 
omeer ma dong wotto ni tabu tabu 	he was so drunk that he could hardly walk and walked with very unsteady gait
Gum ki kica ki kuc ma a ki bot Lubaŋa Won, ki bot Yecu Kricito ma Wode bibedo kwedwa i ada ki mar. 	because of the truth, which lives in us and will be with us forever:
pitto dyangi 	breeding cattle
lokke otunggo woko 	he was overwhelmed by the words or matter 
Atwero jami ducu liweŋ pi Kricito ma miya teko. 	I am not saying this because I am in need, for I have learned to be content whatever the circumstances.
pii ma dong odwon woko tika twerro todde? 	can water which is almost dry be drawn in small quantity?
Gibino bote kun guwaco ni, “Amoti, Kabaka pa Lujudaya!” gidoŋe. 	Then Pilate took Jesus and had him flogged.
Lujudaya gubedo ka yenye i nino madito kun gipenyo ni, “En tye kwene?” 	However, after his brothers had left for the festival, he went also, not publicly, but in secret.
aduno en aye gin matye i kor tung lacam ma ticce en aye me pikko remo i kom, miyo remo mot maber rommo kom ducu	the heart is an organ on the left side of the chest whose work is to pump blood throughout the body
komme wac pe mitto pur 	he is very lazy, he does not want to till the ground
cwinynye oyee doki opwoyo 	he has approved
Ci gikelo bote dano ma ite odiŋ ma te lebe oto, gucako bako doggi bote ni oket ciŋe i kome. 	There some people brought to him a man who was deaf and could hardly talk, and they begged Jesus to place his hand on him.
Jo ma tye i Judaya myero guriŋ i wi godi, jo ma tye i gaŋ myero guriŋ woko ki iye, jo ma tye woko i kin paco pe dok gudony i Jerucalem. 	Then let those who are in Judea flee to the mountains, let those in the city get out, and let those in the country not enter the city.
Pi meno omiyo gilwoŋo poto-nu ni poto me remo nio wa onyoo. 	So they decided to use the money to buy the potter’s field as a burial place for foreigners.
tye ka jony ajonya 	he is wasting away or emaciating 
dog latin jot ki dek ka cammo oyot oyot 	the child's mouth gets smeared with food when he eats quickly
Lacen dok aneno polo manyen ki lobo manyen, pien polo mukwoŋo ki lobo mukwoŋo onoŋo doŋ gurwenyo woko, kadi wa nam bene onoŋo doŋ pe. 	Then I saw “a new heaven and a new earth,” for the first heaven and the first earth had passed away, and there was no longer any sea.
Pi lok man, cakke ma awinyo pi niyewu i kom Rwotwa Yecu, ki pi mar ma wumaro kwede jo pa Lubaŋa ducu, 	who is a deposit guaranteeing our inheritance until the redemption of those who are God’s possession—to the praise of his glory.
Godfrey dong owekko pwony woko odonynyo i politik 	Godfrey has left teaching and has joined politics
jalle nigge twtwal ka gimiine ni otii gin mo pe tiyo oyot oyot 	the fellow wastes much time when he is given something to do, he does not do it quickly 
I kare ma gucokke kacel i Galilaya, Yecu owaco bogti ni, “Wod pa dano gibimiye woko i ciŋ dano, 	He replied, “This kind can come out only by prayer.
rwo ineka ki nyero	chief you kill me with laughter
oo kany i nino me Januari aryo  	he arrived here on the second of January
Tamgi doŋ onyobbe woko, pe doŋ gitwero niaŋ gin mo, kwo ma Lubaŋa miyo nen gin ma welo ki tuŋ botgi, pi kwiya piny ma obino botgi pi cwinygi ma odoko nwaŋ.	So I tell you this, and insist on it in the Lord, that you must no longer live as the Gentiles do, in the futility of their thinking.
latin tigo latig dio ci witto lakkii ma citto cello winyo nekko woko 	the child takes the stone and puts it into the fling and flings it at the bird and hit it dea
ocwee matye ka mette ametta 	is very fat and is getting bigger and bigger 
Piŋo ineno cuŋ kal ma tye i waŋ omeru, ento dul yat ma tye i waŋi in kikomi pe ineno. 	“Why do you look at the speck of sawdust in your brother’s eye and pay no attention to the plank in your own eye?
twom dudde ki tee luduku 	butt his bottom with the butt of the gun
gweno man tweerro gide ma rommo dano matye ni maber mada 	this chicken can be cut into pieces to be enough for the people present
an a ii kwede kumeno me tinggo teerra  	I will struggle alone to carry all my luggage
gin kwo mitte redo	the sweetness of stolen things shouts
ento ka oto, ci ceko nyige mapol. 	Very truly I tell you, unless a kernel of wheat falls to the ground and dies, it remains only a single seed
kanica me legga madit kany tye i Katolika Aileen 	the largest church here is in the Catholic Mission
ocikogi ni, “Wucit i gaŋ ma tye i nyimwu. Ka ce wudonyo iye, ci wutugi noŋo latin kana ma gitweyo, ma ŋatti peya oito i wiye	saying to them, “Go to the village ahead of you, and just as you enter it, you will find a colt tied there, which no one has ever ridden
wang congge ongwec woko ci man mitto arweya i ot yat wek odok maber 	his knee is dislocated, he needs to go to the hospital for manipulation in good position
I kare meno atubatuba magwa ocakke i kom Yo pa Kricito. 	About that time there arose a great disturbance about the Way.
I kom wotgi ducu ma giwoto iye i gaŋi mapatpat gubedo ka miyo bot dano ma guye Kricito cik me aluba ma yam lukwena ki ludoŋo gumako i Jerucalem. 	As they traveled from town to town, they delivered the decisions reached by the apostles and elders in Jerusalem for the people to obey.
owok ki inget bong kic ci orokko kic gubinno gukaye mada 	he passed near the beehive and disturbed the bees which came and stung him badly
Ka pud atye i lobo, an a ceŋ me lobo.” 	Night is coming, when no one can work.
mur pii malyet ka iwek okwee ka dong ilur me amatta 	boil the water, and allow it to cool, and then filter it for drinking 
Ka kare me karama oromo, ci en ooro laticce ka poyo wi jo ma gilwoŋogi ni, ‘Wubin, pien doŋ giyubo jami ducu.’ 	At the time of the banquet he sent his servant to tell those who had been invited, ‘Come, for everything is now ready.’
payo kom obwol  	whittling the small round stool
Ento awaco botwu ni, dano mo ma oryemo dakone, ma pe pi tim me tarwaŋ, ce onyomo dako mukene, noŋo otimo abor.” 	I tell you that anyone who divorces his wife, except for sexual immorality, and marries another woman commits adultery.”
kun giwaco ni, “Laco man tye ka bito dano ni guwor Lubaŋa i yo ma pe lubo cik.” 	“This man,” they charged, “is persuading the people to worship God in ways contrary to the law.”
Ci Kerode olwoŋo luryeko i muŋ, guniaŋe kun gititte kare ma lakalatwe onen iye. 	Then Herod called the Magi secretly and found out from them the exact time the star had appeared.
gupenye ni, “Doŋ piŋo ibatija dano, ka in pe i Kricito ma Lubaŋa oyero, nyo Elia, nyo lanebi meno?” 	Now the Pharisees who had been sent
bur tye i otweg Onek ma lacuc 	there is ulcer on Onek's right elbow 
ckidu wii kkii nyim 	cleaning the simsim grinding stone with the fingers
Gin gucako kelone bote, ci en openyogi ni, “Cal ki coc ma gicoyo i kome-ni pa aŋa?” Ci gugamo ni, “Pa Cecar yo.” 	They brought the coin, and he asked them, “Whose image is this? And whose inscription?” “Caesar’s,” they replied.
aa man in kono doki itimmo ngo? 	what have you done? 
Ka oniaŋ dwan Petero, yomcwiny ogeŋe yabo dog gaŋ woko, ento oriŋo omwomme i ot owacci, “Petero tye ocuŋ woko i dog gaŋ.” 	When she recognized Peter’s voice, she was so overjoyed she ran back without opening it and exclaimed, “Peter is at the door!”
teer palaa paga iket i gwic kuno 	take the panga and put it inside there
Ka doŋ gutyeko wero wer, ci gucito i wi got Jeituni 	When they had sung a hymn, they went out to the Mount of Olives.
Otimmo ngoo 	what have you said? 
Ento kadi bed lumalaika giloyogi ki tek ki twero, pe giyetogi ka gukelo lok i komgi i nyim Rwot. 	yet even angels, although they are stronger and more powerful, do not heap abuse on such beings when bringing judgment on them from the Lord.
ryeyo bongo i wii tol	hanging the clothes on the rope
nyonyo man tette 	this metal can be forged 
cammo cam benye benye pe ber 	eating food bit by bit is not good
Askari bene gugamo lim, ci gutimo kit macalo gicikogi kwede	If this report gets to the governor, we will satisfy him and keep you out of trouble.”
ci owacci, “Nen, aneno polo oyabbe ki Wod pa dano ocuŋ i ŋet Lubaŋa yo tuŋ acuc.” 	“Look,” he said, “I see heaven open and the Son of Man standing at the right hand of God.”
Ento Kricito yam otyero gitum acel keken pi bal, pi kare ducu, ka doŋ obedo piny i ŋet Lubaŋa tuŋ acuc i kabedo me deyo. 	But when this priest had offered for all time one sacrifice for sins, he sat down at the right hand of God,
ladit dong ogaane i wii komme kun kwanno kwedde lok awinya 	the elderly man has sat on his inclined chair and reading a newspaper
parro mada pi rwenyno latinne	mourning very much the loss of his child
Gin gumine kengi ka winyo pwony pa lukwena, ka ribbe kacel ki jo ma guye Yecu, ka camo mugati ma gibaro, ki ka lega. 	They devoted themselves to the apostles’ teaching and to fellowship, to the breaking of bread and to prayer.
ka dong i ol twatwal cup ci jegge i kom ot caa 	if you are too tired of standing, then lean against the wall there
Ento ni jo muto twero cer, Moses kikome bene onyuto, i dul ma gikwano iye lok i kom caka, ka ma en olwoŋo iye Rwot ni, ‘Lubaŋa pa Abraim, Lubaŋa pa Icaka, ki Lubaŋa pa Yakobo.’ 	But in the account of the burning bush, even Moses showed that the dead rise, for he calls the Lord ‘the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob.’
Cimeon otiŋe i bade, opwoyo Lubaŋa kun waco ni, 	Simeon took him in his arms and praised God, saying:
bor pa bongone twerro poorre ka romme 	the length of the dress can be tried if it fits him 
lak kweri pe bit  	the edge of the hoe blade is not sharp
olam ma mit me cek wang aryo	sweet plums are not produced twice
jo mukene gupwodogi apwoda, ki mukene gunekogi aneka. 	He sent many others; some of them they beat, others they killed.
I kare ma gia me cito woko, dano gukelo bote dano mo ma doge oto, ma onoŋo tye ki cen marac. 	But they went out and spread the news about him all over that region.
Meno aye gin mumiyo atamo me cuko cwiny utmegiwa me kwoŋo nyima me bino botwu, wek gin aye koŋ gunen ka mot man ma yam wucikke me miyone-ni wuyubo	But I am sending the brothers in order that our boasting about you in this matter should not prove hollow, but that you may be ready, as I said you would be.
yamo kot matek oputto labila-wii-ot woko   	rain storm blew out the pinnacle of the hut
cun kic cwinynyo dano malit mada 	the sting of the bee is very painful
pung dong canduk woko 	close the box's lid
pien wucal ki nyako ma ayubo me nyomme ki laco acel, kun ageno ni abitere bot cware, en aye Kricito, kun en nyako maleŋ ma pud pe laco mo obedo kwede. 	I am jealous for you with a godly jealousy
macalo an atemo yomo cwiny jo ducu i gin ducu ma atiyo, kun pe alaro pi gin ma konyo an kena, ento alaro pi gin ma konyo jo mapol, wek gularre.	even as I try to pleas
Lubaŋa omi gum i kom ker pa kwarowa Daudi ma obebino-ni! Ojana malo i wi polo!” 	“Blessed is the coming kingdom of our father David!” “Hosanna in the highest heaven!”
ngaa ma ologgo tol i gut romo ni owekko olunynyo woko? 	who has loosened the knot of string on the neck of that sheep that made it pull off its head from the knot?
yer um 	moustache
ci omako mugati abiro-nu ki rec bene, ka doŋ opwoyo, obaro igi, ci omiyogi bot lupwonnyene, ka lupwonnyene gumiyo bot lwak. 	He told the crowd to sit down on the ground.
Ka doŋ okwanye woko, ci dok otiŋo Daudi, oketo me bedo kabakagi. Otito pi Daudi kun waco ni, ‘Atyeko noŋo Daudi wod pa Yece	After removing Saul, he made David their king
Bibedo niŋniŋ ka kono wuneno Wod pa dano kun ito ka ma yam en tye iye con? 	Aware that his disciples were grumbling about this, Jesus said to them, “Does this offend you?
nen litino kitte ma gitye kwedde ka jobbe i pii 	look at the children how they are diving into the water
gwok okwata pe ocee latin gwenoni 	slipping of my tongue has brought trouble
nyim gioddo i pany ki lalek 	simsim is pounded in the mortar using the pestle
pe abino pira kena, en aye oora. 	Jesus said to them, “If God were your Father, you would love me, for I have come here from God
i kare ma anywallo rudi abeddo marac mada 	I was very badly off at the time when I gave birth to twins
Ento Yecu owacci, “Ogik doŋ ki man keken!” Oboŋo ite, ocaŋe. 	But Jesus answered, “No more of this!” And he touched the man’s ear and healed him.
I kare ma Yecu pud tye ka lok, Juda otugi bino	While he was still speaking, Judas, one of the Twelve, arrived
niyeni ocaŋi.” 	Jesus turned and saw her
atye maber  	I am well
ngadi ocitto kwene? 	where has so and so gone? 
gitye ka pwoddo gwiny lukwoo mada ki anino 	they are beating thoroughly the buttocks of the thieves with the hippopotamus hide 
Kombeddi doŋ aŋeyo ni wun ducu ma yam abedo ka wot i kinwu kun apwonyowu ki lok i kom ker pa Lubaŋa pe doŋ wubineno waŋa. 	“Now I know that none of you among whom I have gone about preaching the kingdom will ever see me again.
yoo obeddo pony pony  	the road is full of pot holes
wottu ma kun wulubbe aluba 	walk while following one another 
lok ki wan lok adada mape 'jaw lokke ajugga	tell us the truth and not going round about it
pe ibed ka bollo jami atata kenynyo ma poyo kom dano 	don't throw things about there which startle the people
twer ma en tye kwede oa ki bot Lubanga 	the power which he has, has come from God 
Iyo, ka jo muto pe gibicer, ci doŋ jo ma gibatija pi jo muto-ni gibibedo niŋniŋ? Ka ce cero jo muto pe tye kadi ki acel, piŋo kono dok gibatija pigi? 	Now if there is no resurrection, what will those do who are baptized for the dead? If the dead are not raised at all, why are people baptized for them?
mac tarane dong beddi nywe nywe 	the light from the lamp is flickering as though it is about to go off or vanish
muny ma nok nok ka itye ka matto pii malyet twatwal 	swallow in small amounts when you are drinking hot water
Odoŋ kuro ŋolo kop keken kun watye ki lworo madwoŋ, ki mac mager ma bityeko dano ma gipyem ki Lubaŋa. 	but only a fearful expectation of judgment and of raging fire that will consume the enemies of God.
pe i week jamini olal ata, pid pirre matek 	do not stand to just lose your property, plead vingorously for it
ento kado ka doŋ odoko bot, ci gibitimo niŋniŋ wek dok odok mit? Konnye doŋ noŋo pe, myero giony woko dano onyon. 	But if the salt loses its saltiness, how can it be made salty again? It is no longer good for anything, except to be thrown out and trampled underfoot.
lee mapol tye ki yib nyo kono lacek en aye yibgi rem ma pe pien titinomo 	most of the animals have tails except dik dik are the ones that can be said to have almost no tail because it is very small
Giyikowa kacel ki Kricito i tone i batija ma walimo, wek wabed calo en. En yam ocer woko ki i kin jo muto pi deyo pa Wonne, wek wan bene doŋ walub kit kwo manyen-nu. 	Or don’t you know that all of us who were baptized into Christ Jesus were baptized into his death?
dano gucokke madowong mada ka nenno tukko 	many people gathered yesterday to see the game
paro lim, bal maraco, bwolo dano, kwele, nyeko, yet, wakke ki miŋo. 	adultery, greed, malice, deceit, lewdness, envy, slander, arrogance and folly.
Ci en binyuto botwu kicika ot malac ma malo ma gipeto, giyubo maber	He will show you a large room upstairs, all furnished
pien oloyo tam pa Lujudaya atyer i nyim lwak kun nyuto ki i ginacoya ni Kricito ma Lubaŋa oyero aye Yecu.	For he vigorously refuted his Jewish opponents in public debate, proving from the Scriptures that Jesus was the Messiah.
“Gitye ki gum jo ma giŋeyo ni gin lucan i lok me cwiny, pien ker me polo megi. 	“Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.
Ento Yecu ociko waŋe i komgi, owaco ni, “Man kono gin aŋo ma yam gicoyo ni, ‘Got ma lugedo gukwero-ni en aye odoko got madit ma i twok ot’? 	Jesus looked directly at them and asked, “Then what is the meaning of that which is written: “‘The stone the builders rejected has become the cornerstone’?
Jon otito lok me kwena maber bot lwak kun cuko cwinygi ki lok mukene mapol. 	And with many other words John exhorted the people and proclaimed the good news to them.
lacoo caa tye ka gwelli 	the man there is beckoning you
ka oneno Petero ci oa obedo abeda. 	Turning toward the dead woman, he said, “Tabitha, get up.” She opened her eyes, and seeing Peter she sat up.
Pien wan pe walwenyo i kom dano ma tye ki kom ki remo, ento walwenyo ki luloc ki wegi twero ma woko, ki i kom gin ducu ma loyo wi lobo ducu i kare man me colpiny, dok ki dul mony mogo maraco me cwiny ma tye i polo. 	Put on the full armor of God, so that you can take your stand against the devil’s schemes.
itye ka tammo ngoo? 	what are you thinking about or pondering over or considering about? 
Ci yito odok eceta ma giwaŋo oa ki i ciŋ lamalaika ma onoŋo tye i nyim Lubaŋa, oduny kacel ki lega pa jo pa Lubaŋa ocito malo. 	The smoke of the incense, together with the prayers of God’s people, went up before God from the angel’s hand.
latin wotto tee te 	the baby walks unsteadily or tottering
lwak pa Otto 	the people ot Otto 
ineno kwene? lokke botta kany 	where are you looking to? turn towards me here
ogwal acel lello wang pii woko miyo doko col 	the child's cheek is dirty
wot ki kuc, twoni doŋ otyeko caŋ matwal.” 	Go in peace and be freed from your suffering.”
Pi man dano ducu biŋeyo ni wun lupwonnyena, ka mer tye i kinwu.” 	As I have loved you, so you must love one another.
Yecu odwogo ki i Jordan kun opoŋ ki Cwiny Maleŋ, cutcut Cwiny Maleŋ otere wa i tim. 	Jesus, full of the Holy Spirit, left the Jordan and was led by the Spirit into the wilderness,
Obolo botgi carolok ni, “Yam tye dano mo ma lalonyo ma cam ocek madwoŋ i potone. 	And he told them this parable: “The ground of a certain rich man yielded an abundant harvest.
litinone komgi wac mada ka tic tye gimaarro gutte woko i ot 	the children are very lazy when there is some work they like to hide themselves in the house
en oturro cik me cukul myero gimiine makatala  	he broke the school rule, he must be punished 
kom kwac obeddo gwaka-gwaka  	leopard's skin is spotted black and white
En obino tugi, ento jone pe gujole. 	He was in the world, and though the world was made through him, the world did not recognize him.
wiye odin ni juny 	he has a lot of hair 
pitto gweni 	rearing chicken 
i dye okar-mac abiro-nu aneno iye ŋat mo ma cal ki wod pa dano. Dano-nu orukke woko ki jor mabor, ki del me jabu ma otweyo i kore. 	and among the lampstands was someone like a son of man, dressed in a robe reaching down to his feet and with a golden sash around his chest.
Dako odokke iye ni, “Ladit, in ipe ki gitwomo, waŋ it bene tut	Jesus answered her, “If you knew the gift of God and who it is that asks you for a drink, you would have asked him and he would have given you living water.”
pot oummo wang ceng woko 	the clouds have covered the sun's sight
in dong kiit pe myero ibed ka Iweny ki litino 	you are now big, you should not be fighting with the children
lwayo ot madit yot ento ketto jami ma iiye aya tek mada 	building a big house is easy but fitting it with things is very difficult
Ento magi gicoyo wek wuye ni, Yecu en Kricito ma Lubaŋa oyero, Wod pa Lubaŋa, ci ka wuye, wek wubed ki kwo i nyiŋe.	Jesus performed many other signs in the presence of his disciples, which are not recorded in this book.
Atittiwu ni,, i dyewor meno co aryo bibuto wi kitanda acel, gibikwanyo ŋat acel, gibiweko ŋat acel doŋ. 	I tell you, on that night two people will be in one bed; one will be taken and the other left.
I lwak jo muye Yecu i kabedo acel acel guketo ludoŋo ma ka-kagi ki lega ki ri kec, ci gumiyogi i ciŋ Rwot ma yam guye-ni. 	Paul and Barnabas appointed elders for them in each church and, with prayer and fasting, committed them to the Lord, in whom they had put their trust.
En owaco botgi ni, “Kit cen macalo man pe ryemme pi gin mo, ento ki lega keken.” 	He replied, “This kind can come out only by prayer.”
lanyekko callo gweno, omiyo gipyello i ot 	he is jealous like chicken that is why they deposit their droppings in the house
tyerro atabo dek ki lwak 	laying before the people dishes to eat
Ocako cito anyim manok, ci oguŋo oryebbe piny olego ni, “Wora, ka ce imito, kwany kikopo man woko ki i koma	Going a little farther, he fell with his face to the ground and prayed, “My Father, if it is possible, may this cup be taken from me
oceke ki weko kun mol	the beer sucking tube is left while it is still flowing
lum ma otwoo pe luk ki toyo 	the dried grass does not get covered with dew
Ka giciko waŋgi malo i kore ma kun en cito, ci nen, jo aryo gucuŋ ka ŋetgi ma guruko kanyi matar, 	They were looking intently up into the sky as he was going, when suddenly two men dressed in white stood beside them.
nyebbe ki lwii ki i cukul 	getting used to escaping from the school
I kare ma pud an latin, aloko lok calo latin, aparo jami ducu calo latin	When I was a child, I talked like a child, I thought like a child, I reasoned like a child
ngat man boko kot mupwode	each person tells of the train that drenched him
twol tye ka munynyo ogwal 	the snake is swallowing the frog 
Ci lok ma yam gicoyo i ginacoya-ni doŋ bicobbe kakare niŋniŋ, ni myero obed kit meno?” 	But how then would the Scriptures be fulfilled that say it must happen in this way?”
ryec pa acikari puddi peya ber 	the lining up of the police is not yet good
en obeddo nama adii?	what number was he?
Ento dano mo acel i kom jo ma onoŋo gitye kacel ki Yecu oryeyo ciŋe ci owoto pala lucwanne, otoŋo ki opii pa ajwaka madit pa Lubaŋa, oŋuno ite woko. 	With that, one of Jesus’ companions reached for his sword, drew it out and struck the servant of the high priest, cutting off his ear.
nyonne i gweyo odilo pe ber 	kicking someone's leg in football is not good
en bene ononggo tye iye  	he was also there
Ento Yecu yam lwitte kare ki kare cito ka lega i tim. 	Yet the news about him spread all the more, so that crowds of people came to hear him and to be healed of their sicknesses.
piny tin oruu marac 	there is trouble today
motoka mene ma wumito 	what type of motor car do you want?
“Pi niyene omiyo gikwane ni en dano ma kite atir.” 	being fully persuaded that God had power to do what he had promised.
En yam otamo ni gwok nyo omegine giŋeyo ni Lubaŋa oyubo ni bimiyo gilarre pi ticce, ento pe guniaŋ. 	Moses thought that his own people would realize that God was using him to rescue them, but they did not.
litino twerro ryeene kany 	the children can be lined here
wii atii Lubaga oketto dano 	God created the people at the beginning 
opal tye kwene me cwerro tee agulu kwon? 	where is the oyster shell for scraping the inside bottom of the pot for kwon? 
“Aŋa ma ŋeyo tam pa Rwot? Aŋa ma yam miye tam?” 	Oh, the depth of the riches of the wisdom and knowledge of God! How unsearchable his judgments, and his paths beyond tracing out!
gucitto ka cwiiyo ting a a 	they went to suck left over of local brew or dregs with tubes from a pot
tonggo twon nyero 	breaking out into a fit of laughter
ononggo ret ka dwar pien ononggo pe gilammo maber 	he was hurt during the hunt because he was not blessed 
i lyek en aye lum mabecco ma yom twii iye ma lee gicammo 	it is in this field where the grasses have been burnt, so that fresh grasses grow which the animals graze on 
pali ma ding twatwal pe becco ki mon 	tight pair of trousers are not good for women
lak kweri nyany woko ka i purro kwedde i kor got 	the edge of the hoe will become blunt if you use it for cultivating a rocky field 
Watye ki keno tyer ma lutic i kema macon ca pe gitye ki twero mo me cam iye. 	We have an altar from which those who minister at the tabernacle have no right to eat.
man en aye latin cogo mera ma gallo wiya 	this is my last born child who keeps entertains me 
Yecu dok ocako pwony i dog nam. Lwak madwoŋ twatwal gucokke bote	Again Jesus began to teach by the lake
litino gimaarro cammo oywelo mada 	the children love very much to eat oywelo
twon em dyang ni ryany 	a very big cow's thigh 
ocato potone ma en tye kwede, ci okelo limme oketo ka tyen lukwena.	sold a field he owned and brought the money and put it at the apostles’ feet.
puggo dong bege tek mada	to close the bank's door is very difficult
Lwak lucaden mapol gubedo ka kelo lok goba i kome, ma lokgi ducu pe rwatte. 	Many testified falsely against him, but their statements did not agree.
Jo macalo meno pe gin lutic pa Rwotwa Kricito	Greet Philologus, Julia, Nereus and his sister, and Olympas and all the Lord’s people who are with them.
ngeyo pwonynyo dano i tic me pa 	he knows how to train people in carpentry
Tit botwa gin ma itamo. Cikwa ye ni gicul mucoro bot cecar nyo pe?” 	Then the Pharisees went out and laid plans to trap him in his words.
pe ber mon ma oturro adyeny me rukko pall ma bocco	it is not nice for women who have protruding buttocks to wear trousers
Ka Rwot oŋeyo ni Luparicayo guwinyo ni Yecu tye ka loko jo mapol doko lupwonnyene ki batijagi, makato Jon, 	But the chief priests and the Pharisees had given orders that anyone who found out where Jesus was should report it so that they might arrest him.
Ka dano mo winyo lokka ci pe mako, an pe aŋolo kop i kome	I have come into the world as a light, so that no one who believes in me should stay in darkness.
yikke obeddo lok madit mada	his burial was a very important matter 
Ka dok aneno lamalaika mo ocuŋ i ceŋ. En olwoŋo kwa winyo ducu mapatpat ma gituk i dye yamo ki dwan maloŋo ni, “Wubin, wugurre kacel ka camo cam me otyeno ma Lubaŋa oyubo, 	And I saw an angel standing in the sun, who cried in a loud voice to all the birds flying in midair, “Come, gather together for the great supper of God,
Cutcut obino bot Yecu atir, ocako mote ni, “Lapwony itye!” Ci onoto leme. 	Going at once to Jesus, Judas said, “Greetings, Rabbi!” and kissed him.
ceng potto cawa apar wiye aryo 	the sun sets at six 
jubi ma ginekkoni, en open mere ki em 	he is lucky he got the thigh from the bufallo killed 
pien pe wun aye wubilok, ento Cwiny Maleŋ pa Wonwu aye bilok ki i iwu. 	for it will not be you speaking, but the Spirit of your Father speaking through you.
bade oduggu woko pi kic ma nakanen okaaye 	his arm is swollen because he has been bitten by the bees
Ento ka pe wuye lok ma en ocoyo, wubiye niŋniŋ lok ma an atittiwu?”	Your accuser is Moses, on whom your hopes are set.
Ka lupwony-cik mogo, ma onoŋo gibedo kunnu, gubedo ka pyem kekengi wa i cwinygi ni, 	Now some teachers of the law were sitting there, thinking to themselves,
ka iguddo kero opuk ma tye ka wot ci ryebbe woke piyn ka dok gunynyo wiye bene i pokke 	when you touch a tortoise which is walking, it stops and goes down on its belly and at the same time withdraws its head into its shell
kun onoŋo lwaka dano mapol ma guye Kricito ma gitye i kabedo ducu i Judaya peya giŋeya dok peya guneno koma. 	Then I went to Syria and Cilicia.
ento koŋ kwoŋo tweyo dano ma kome tek-ki, ka doŋ biyako jamine ma i ode. 	Then he can plunder the strong man’s house.
Ci giketogi i nyim lukwena, ka gulego ci guketo ciŋgi i komgi. 	They presented these men to the apostles, who prayed and laid their hands on them.
obut ki i dine ci opotto piny 	it slipped from his hand and fell down
yat tye ka yegge ki yamo 	the tree is being shaken by the wind 
Wumine kenwu i te loc pa jo mukene, ŋat man bot lawote, pi woro Kricito. 	always giving thanks to God the Father for everything, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.
“I kare meno ka ce dano mo biwaco botwu ni, ‘Nen, Kricito ma Lubaŋa oyero tye kany’, nyo ni, ‘Nen, tye kuca’, pe wuye. 	At that time if anyone says to you, ‘Look, here is the Messiah!’ or, ‘There he is!’ do not believe it.
wang ge beddi rwi-rwi 	his eyes are restless, opening and shutting or closing
nyim latino nyo lajimu cek maber mada ka gicoyo i Agucito 	the latino or lajimu simsim grow and yield very well when sown in August
Yecu owaccigi ni, “Wubin ka cam.” Pe tye ŋat mo i kin lupwonnye ma odiyo cwinye me penye ni, “In aŋa?” Pien giŋeyo ni en Rwot. 	Jesus said to them, “Bring some of the fish you have just caught.”
“Wupwony carolok i kom yat oduro. Cutcut ka jaŋe olot, ci pote luk, ci doŋ wuŋeyo ni oro cok. 	“Now learn this lesson from the fig tree: As soon as its twigs get tender and its leaves come out, you know that summer is near.
coo jami mukene bene macallo nngor, ki lapena 	sow also other things like cowpeas, and pigeon peas
litino tin gupwoone mada pi mot mapol mada ma gimiinigi pi loyo i tukko mapol me ngwec 	the children today were very thankful for the gifts which they were given for winning many events of the athletics
witto latig dio atata cello dano 	flinging the stones about will hit the people 
makaa as i kom yen ma giwanggo i lakit yoo moni mamiyo dokko bile ento pe buro 	charcoal is obtained from woods that have been burnt in a special way that makes them not being burnt to ashes 
Pi meno, jo ma tye ki niye gibinoŋo gum kacel ki Abraim mubedo ki niye. 	Scripture foresaw that God would justify the Gentiles by faith, and announced the gospel in advance to Abraham: “All nations will be blessed through you.”
lotto pe ngeyo purro pur maber 	the fellow does not know how to cultivate very well
kel opam ne dinno kal 	bring the short block of wood for threshing the millet 
Ka lwak mapol gucokke kacel, kun dano gubino bote ma gia ki i gaŋi mapol, Yecu oloko i carolok ni, 	While a large crowd was gathering and people were coming to Jesus from town after town, he told this parable:
Ka guwinyo lok meno, ci gutugge ma gukayo lakgi woko likiŋ 	When the members of the Sanhedrin heard this, they were furious and gnashed their teeth at him.
Atittiwu ni, Kricito yam olokke odoko latic ma okonyo Lujudaya, pi nyuto ni Lubaŋa loko lok ada, kun bene cobo gin ma yam Lubaŋa ocikke iye bot kwarowa macon, 	Accept one another, then, just as Christ accepted you, in order to bring praise to God.
gat mape ngeyo tic mo wacel	one who does not know how o do any work properly at all
pii pe myero omol lataya kany 	the water must not run continuously here 
Lacen Lubaŋa ocikogi ni pe gudok cen ki ŋegi bot Kerode, ci gudok tugi doŋ kun gilubo yo mukene. 	And having been warned in a dream not to go back to Herod, they returned to their country by another route.
moo ma tye i wii cak twerro labbe maber 	the cream which is on the milk can be easily skimmed 
Daudi ki dako pa Uria gunywalo Solomon	David was the father of Solomon, whose mother had been Uriah’s wife,
Ci gimake gitere i nyim cokke ma yam rwatte i wi got ma gilwoŋo Areopago, kun giwaco ni, “Wamito ŋeyo kit pwony manyen ma ikelo-ni, 	Then they took him and brought him to a meeting of the Areopagus, where they said to him, “May we know what this new teaching is that you are presenting?
nyekke pe mitte liweng 	her co- wife does not like her at all 
Yecu owacce ni, “Ada awacci ni, tin ki i dyewor, ma noŋo twon gweno peya okok, ibikwera woko tyen adek.” 	“Truly I tell you,” Jesus answered, “this very night, before the rooster crows, you will disown me three times.”
Kwarowa Abraim yam pe gikwano ni kite atir pi tic, i kare ma en otyero wode Icaka me bedo gitum i wi keno tyer? 	Was not our father Abraham considered righteous for what he did when he offered his son Isaac on the altar?
Utmegina, kit macalo doŋ wuye Rwotwa Yecu Kricito kwede-ni, ma en Rwot me deyo, pe dok wuket apokapoka mo i kin dano. 	My brothers and sisters, believers in our glorious Lord Jesus Christ must not show favoritism.
pii man lyet twatwal mitto acomma ki pii magic ka wek obed ma mor mor	the water is too hot, it needs cold water to be poured into it to make it lukewarm
Pien tin i dyewor man lamalaika pa Lubaŋa ma an a danone, ma an aworo-ni, obino ocuŋ ka ŋeta, 	Last night an angel of the God to whom I belong and whom I serve stood beside me
tye joo mukene ma gin lutim goga mada 	there are some people who are very good at making jokes 
cki dek matye i tee agulune woko 	clear or clean what sauce is remaining inside the pot
taara ni ka gicwinynyo taarre menynyo dye kal woko 	this lamp when it is lit its brightness covers all the compound
toile pe tek gwok koni cot woko 	the rope is not strong it might break 
Wuciti wupwonye tyen lok man ni, ‘Amito kica, pe lee me gitum.’ Pien pe abino ka lwoŋo jo ma kitgi atir, ento lubalo.” 	On hearing this, Jesus said, “It is not the healthy who need a doctor, but the sick.
Wun doŋ gityeko lonyowu pi lok ma aloko botwu. 	He cuts off every branch in me that bears no fruit, while every branch that does bear fruit he prunes so that it will be even more fruitful.
maar tic ma itiyo ci pe ibinoggo iye pekko 	love the work that you do and you will not find difficulties in it
twol laco-codo kwirre kec mada 	snake laco-codo is very poisonous
Gin dok gucito gutito bot jo mudoŋ-ŋi, gin bene dok pe guye lokgi. 	These returned and reported it to the rest; but they did not believe them either.
ngal lawotti ni ma tek wek oniang 	tease or ridicule very much your friend to make him understand
tye ature yadi mogo ma miyo dano jirro mada 	there are flowers of some trees which make people sneeze very much
Luker me lobo gurye i tyeŋ, ki luloc bene gucokke gugurre kacel i kom Rwot ki i kom ŋat ma en oyero ka doŋ owiro.’ 	The kings of the earth rise up and the rulers band together against the Lord and against his anointed one.’
Ka opoto piny ci owinyo dwan ma waco bote ni, “Caulo, Caulo, iyela piŋo?” 	He fell to the ground and heard a voice say to him, “Saul, Saul, why do you persecute me?”
ka gat ma onenno ni lokke pe gigollo maber twerro kok apil i Kot ma Mato 	if a man feels that his case has not been well judged, he can appeal to the Higher Court
Gupenye ni, “Lanyut aŋo ma in itiyo, wek wanen, waye in? Tic aŋo ma in itiyo? 	Jesus answered, “The work of God is this: to believe in the one he has sent.”
luurro kal pe gin ma yot	to thresh the millet is not an easy job, work 
labwor nya oculi 	a small kind of lion which lives with others in groups 
dyanggine gucwee mada 	the cows are very fat 
warommo ki lagudi i kare ma onongo waecitto i kulo 	we met the hyena on the road as we were going to the river 
ka inenno ki tegge ci nen nyen ento gin macon 	when you look at it from a far off, it looks new but it is an old thing 
Pe meno keken, ento wabibedo ki yomcwiny i Lubaŋa pi Rwotwa Yecu Kricito, pien en aye ma omiyo gidwokowa cen bot Lubaŋa. 	Since we have now been justified by his blood, how much more shall we be saved from God’s wrath through him!
monyo pa dakone cweer twatwal 	she bleeds very much when menstruating 
owacco ni ebinno diki 	he said he would come tomorrow 
piyo lapii wek mac opotti 	turning the wood drill at high speed in a hole in the wood so that fire may be produced from it
I kare ma atye i Jerucalem, ajwagi madito pa Lubaŋa ki ludoŋo pa Lujudaya gutitta lok i kome, ci gulega ni aŋol ni kop oloye. 	When I went to Jerusalem, the chief priests and the elders of the Jews brought charges against him and asked that he be condemned.
Yecu owaco botgi ni, “Wun pe wuŋeyo gin ma wulego. Wun wutwero mato ki kikopo ma abimato kwede-ni	“You don’t know what you are asking,” Jesus said
jukko nyim	scooping simsim with a hand
ceng abicel en aye ceng me yweyo	the sixth day is a day for rest
remo tye ka ton ki i umme	the blood is dropping from his nose
anyira man gitye ka piyo lateke teke ma mit mada 	these girls are dancing by nicely shaking of their waists in a special way 
cep wanggi ojwirro gin apitta mapol mada 	this time the sun has withered many plants
Gin gua woko ki botwa, pien onoŋo yam gin pe gubedo dano ma mewa	They went out from us, but they did not really belong to us
Ento wun luwota, wudoŋ matek i niyewu maleŋ twatwal-li, kun wulego Lubaŋa i Cwiny Maleŋ. 	These are the people who divide you, who follow mere natural instincts and do not have the Spirit.
Yecu owaco botgi ni, “Moses omiyowu cik meno pi cwinywu manwaŋ. 	“It was because your hearts were hard that Moses wrote you this law,” Jesus replied.
kit meno Kricito bene otyerre kene kicel me tiŋo bal pa jo mapol, dok binen tyen me aryo, pe doŋ pi tic i kom bal, ento pi laro jo ma tye ka kure.	so Christ was sacrificed once to take away the sins of many; and he will appear a second time, not to bear sin, but to bring salvation to those who are waiting for him.
nyeb winyoni ki cam wek imakki 	entice the bird with food so that you may catch it
teer leela bot pundi leela oyubi 	take your bicycle to the mechanic for repair 
gitye ka lweny 	they are fighting
lokke oran ki iyo 	the case never materialised 
Pe gibiwaco botwu ni, ‘Nen, en ene!’ nyo ni, ‘En ca!’ pien nen, ker pa Lubaŋa doŋ tye i kinwu.” 	nor will people say, ‘Here it is,’ or ‘There it is,’ because the kingdom of God is in your midst.”
itye ka timmo ngoo? 	what are you doing?
cwinya yom i kom Lubaŋa Lalarra, 	and my spirit rejoices in God my Savior,
Owacce ni, ‘In bene ibibedo ki twero i kom gaŋi abic.’ 	“His master answered, ‘You take charge of five cities.’
Ocito bot Pilato ci olego kom Yecu. Ci Pilato ociko ni gimiye. 	Among them were Mary Magdalene, Mary the mother of James and Joseph, and the mother of Zebedee’s sons.
tem latin meno twerro palle pien tukko twatwal I kilaci 	the child's cheek can be slapped because he plays too much in class 
yer udu kono en aye dano timmo beddo kono wic ma girukko i wiigi me myel makatto me myel Bwola 	the water is good it can be used for rinsing the mouth
Wutye ki waŋwu, ci pe wuneno kwede? Wutye ki itwu, pe wuwinyo kwede? Wun pe wupo ce? 	Do you have eyes but fail to see, and ears but fail to hear? And don’t you remember?
wakko dano ka dwar, myel, pur, ki mon ka kac 	inviting people to come for hunting, dancing, cultivation and women for harvesting
orwenynyo lim madowong mada omiyo dong nenno piny ni bai pien pe ngeyo gin angoo ma myero etii 	he lost a lot of money, that is why he stares blankly because he does not know what to do
bin ikonywa tello motoka man ma oballe woko ki iyoo kany water paco 	come and help us to pull this car which is spoiled on the road to take it home 
litino ducu gimaarro cammo ocone  	children love to eat ocone very much
gupwoddo dud dano ki aniino 	they beat the people's buttocks with the whip
I kare ca onoŋo wulubo yo maraco me lobo man, kun wuwinyo lok pa ŋat ma loyo twer mogo ma tye malo i dye yamo, ma en aye cwiny ma kombeddi tye ka tic i i jo ma dag winyo lok ma Lubaŋa waco. 	As for you, you were dead in your transgressions and sins,
labolo atedda twerro conynye 	cooked plantain can be dented 
wang burre tye ka cweer remo 	his ulcer is bleeding
Lonyowu doŋ otop woko, kadi ki ginarukawu bene nyenye ocamo woko. 	Your wealth has rotted, and moths have eaten your clothes.
Juda ma en ŋat ma odobe openye bene ni, “Lapwony, an mono?” Yecu odokke iye ni, “In iwaco giri kit meno.” 	Then Judas, the one who would betray him, said, “Surely you don’t mean me, Rabbi?” Jesus answered, “You have said so.”
tii pii i agulo ature man 	pour water into this flower pot 
gitye pud ka nyammo lokke 	they are still discussing the matter 
munynyo yat  	swallowing the medicine
gin ducu gulor i pii, Pilipo ki laco ma gikolo, ci Pilipo obatija en. 	Then both Philip and the eunuch went down into the water and Philip baptized him.
En dok owaco ki gin ni, “An abicito woko. Wun wubiyenya, wubito i balwu	I am one who testifies for myself; my other witness is the Father, who sent me.”
Myero gipwo Lubaŋa ma nino ducu tye ka telowa i dorre me nyuto loc pa Kricito, dok tiyo kwedwa wek Kricito oŋene, macalo gin makur ma ŋwece duny i kabedo ducu. 	Another reason I wrote you was to see if you would stand the test and be obedient in everything.
latinni tye tukko i wii yat koni rwacce piny nia ki i wii yat 	the child is playing about on top of the tree, if he is not careful, he may fall down very badly from there
gang go dwol dyel ki okuto 	fencing the goats' pen with thorns
lalelee mol ni lala lala  	the rain water flowing down copiously
litino tin gucello Iwak winyo mapol mada ki abutkia	the children shot many birds today with the catapults
ngat ma matto latek twatwal, latek labbo dongge woko 	one who smokes too much, his lower lip becomes deformed by the pipe 
kadi bed cwinynya pe mitto cam, wek adil kwede kumeno	even though I do not like to eat let me push it in all the same
apwoyo lok meeri    	I agree with what you said
lil kal man maleng mada wek koni gireg 	clean this millet very well so that it will be grounded
nyebbe ka wot ma nok nok ki odiko con ci mot mot ibinong go ni imaarro wot 	get used to walking now and then in the morning and slowly you will find that you like to walk everyday 
layo i ot dyewor 	passes urine at night in the house
i kanica dano ducu rummo conggi ka leggo Lubanga 	in the church every person kneels down to pray to God
pi kokko too, obolle kenne ni tac marac mada	because of weeping for the dead,she threw herself very badly on the ground
ocikogi ni pe myero gumi pire oŋene. 	But the Pharisees went out and plotted how they might kill Jesus.
Ka lunyodone gunene, guuro	When his parents saw him, they were astonished
tyer mewu tye kwene? 	where is your offering? 
pe inyommo waat  	you do not many a relative
lyel pa wooru tye i get ot tung kwica 	your father's grave is on the,the side of the house
dongge bit 	he has a sharp tongue
cung kenyo 	stand there
Ento jo mukene i kingi gucito bot Luparicayo, gutittigi gin ma Yecu otiyo. 	Therefore many of the Jews who had come to visit Mary, and had seen what Jesus did, believed in him.
wonne otuc mapudi peya gucakko cam me dye ceng 	the father arrived suddenly before they had started lunch
Man aye gin ma gipwoyo, ka ce dano ciro arem ma noŋo cwinye tye i kom Lubaŋa, ka giune ma noŋo pe obalo. 	Slaves, in reverent fear of God submit yourselves to your masters, not only to those who are good and considerate, but also to those who are harsh.
kit gin mo ma wupimo kwede-ni, en aye gibipimo ki mewu bene, dok gibimedone botwu. 	“With the measure you use, it will be measured to you—and even more.
pet kitanda me butto 	prepare the bed for us to sleep, in other words, spread the sheets and blanket on the bed for sleeping 
dano ma ranynyo lok beddo kwede tek mada 	it is difficult to stay with a man who always speaks scornfully and sarcastically
anyira kwan pe cunne atata 	the school girls cannot be courted
guraddo lee mape wacce 	they killed indiscriminately many animals 
latin man dong tye ka twil atwilla 	the child is getting thin and thinner
rwom me Joe me Acoli ononggo tye kitman, cakke ki i kom: won paco, mukugu, jango ka nio kom rwot 	the administration hierarchy of the Acholi was like this: from the head of the village, parish chief, sub chief to chief
gitiyo balun ma reggi gi pat pat ma giketto me deyo me nine mo madit 	it is made of different colours for celebrations of important days 
ento cibo i wi okar, wek dano ducu ma gibino i ot gunen derone. 	Instead they put it on its stand, so that those who come in may see the light.
Lukwena ki ludo jo gucokke gugurre ka laro lok man. 	The apostles and elders met to consider this question.
tweggo lok myero ki mon ma doggi beddi tweg tweg labonggo gik ento pe ber ki coo 	talking too much belongs to women who go on talking non-stop but not good for men
Ŋat mo myero pe obed ki ur i lok man, pien kadi Catan kikome bene lokke nen macalo lamalaika ma menyo piny. 	For such people are false apostles, deceitful workers, masquerading as apostles of Christ.
gitye ka cammo obot dek 	they are eating the food left over yesterday
aruddo dong doggola nyonyo ma gwaarri ci man dong pe gwaar 	I filed the rough surfaces of the metal door and now it is not rough
litino abwogga nino ducu pittongi tek mada ka pud gitino	the premature children, are usually very difficult to feed while they are still very small
Atamo bene ni myero acwal omera Epaprodito botwu, ma en latic wadwa ma olwenyo kacel kweda, en ŋat ma yam wuore bota pi konya i pekona-ni. 	And I am confident in the Lord that I myself will come soon.
lakwena meeri tye kwenne? 	where is your messenger? 
nyim tye ka mol ki i wang dero lakodo ma oyoo otucco 	the simsim is leaking out through the hole that a rat has made in the granary 
larok acel acel ducu matye kany myerro obin ka coyo nyingge i buk ka wek gingee kama en beddo iye 	every foreigner who is here, must come for registration so that the place where she stays is known
rec man twerro pedde maber mada 	the fish can be cut and opened widely 
Pien coc ma yam gicoyo oloko ni, “En bibedo ajwaka nakanaka, i kit pa Melkijedek.” 	For it is declared: “You are a priest forever, in the order of Melchizedek.”
a a lok ma ilokkoni pe atilt'	no, what you have said is not right
Jo ma guye Yecu gucokke kacel, kun ginywako jami ducu kacel. 	All the believers were together and had everything in common.
yoo gudo mewa dong opong ki pony pony keken 	our roads are now full of potholes 
piny ma lyet toppo labolo woko ka giwekko orii iye 	hot weather causing the rotting of bananas
Onoŋo wan ducu ma wabedo i mel waromo dano miya aryo ki pyerabiro wiye abicel. 	Altogether there were 276 of us on board.
an don atii woko 	I am very old
tye ka ngunno ki wan lok me goba kany 	he is telling us a pack of lies
tye ka pangge ata 	he is just roaming about aimlessly with no job
nyarro nyim ni rail 	collecting the stems of the simsim together and cut them
nyako ma caar en aye gukko ma yac woko ma noggo en pud latin kwan 	a loose girl is the one that gets pregnant while she is still a school girl 
Petero owaco botgi ni, “Wuŋut, gibatijawu ŋat acel acel ki i kinwu i nyiŋ Yecu Kricito, wek Lubaŋa owek balwu	Peter replied, “Repent and be baptized, every one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ for the forgiveness of your sins
yokko wic ki tee luduku	hits the head with the butt of the gun
wii latin obutto ni pac pien pe gilyello otum 	the child's hair remained partially shaved because it was not completely done
twakko ringo ma otwoo nyo del raa	cooking for a long time dried meat or hippopotamus hide
Lonygi i ada gibed maleŋ: lokki en ada. 	They are not of the world, even as I am not of it.
Deyo obed bot Ŋat ma twero gwokowu miyo pe wupoto, dok ma twero miyo wucuŋ laboŋo roc mo i nyim deyone ki yomcwiny. 	save others by snatching them from the fire; to others show mercy, mixed with fear—hating even the clothing stained by corrupted flesh.
wer me pakko Lubaga  	hymns for praising God but there are songs of praises for God
pagi wir ot 	the chief or the main central pole supporting the root of the hut
pe wuwek mac olyel piny oruu 	do not leave the light on throughout the night 
dano gubakke i bar odilo ni yim 	the people assembled in at large numbers the football field
Ka genwa i kom Kricito konyowa i kwo me kare-ni keken, ci doŋ noŋo watye marac makato jo ducu. 	If only for this life we have hope in Christ, we are of all people most to be pitied.
tong dul yen maniye adek 	cut this piece of wood into three pieces
odaa mada ki cwaarre 	she quarrelled with her husband very much 
nget doggola 	near the door 
ogilo lak pa gun ducu gibocco mada pien en aye me yecco ringo ma gicammo 	the canine tooth of all the carnivore are very long because they are for tearing off meat for eating
toile giwiyo goddo-goddo	the rope has been twisted in varying thickness, some parts thick and others thin 
tyene aryo ducu onoŋo calo mola ma giliyo i keno, ka lacen doŋ girudo woko odoko maleŋ, kun dwane mor winnye calo mor pa pii ma corre. 	His feet were like bronze glowing in a furnace, and his voice was like the sound of rushing waters.
piyo latin ni ogoo lawotte 	inciting the child to beat his friend
pang wiye woko 	turn him away 
kal lwok pe dako pa two	the place for bathing is not the place for drying
I nino meno ka piny doŋ oyuto, Yecu owaco botgi ni, “Wakatu loka ca.” 	That day when evening came, he said to his disciples, “Let us go over to the other side.”
yoo aryo orocco lalur 	two ways confused the hyena 
I kaka pa Jabulon giketo lanyut i kom dano alip apar wiye aryo. I kaka pa Yucepu giketo lanyut i kom dano alip apar wiye aryo. I kaka pa Benjamin giketo lanyut i kom dano alip apar wiye aryo. 	from the tribe of Zebulun 12,000, from the tribe of Joseph 12,000, from the tribe of Benjamin 12,000.
Yecu odok iye botgi ni, “Wun pe Wukwano gin ma nene Daudi otiyo ce? Ka nene kec oneke, en ki jo ma onoŋo gitye kacel kwede, 	Jesus answered them, “Have you never read what David did when he and his companions were hungry?
dano ka mitti komme obed ma yot ma bur atata pe yelle dok bene ma komme yot ci myerro ocam nyig yadi ki pot dek madwong mada 	if a man wants to be fit and healthy he must eat a lot of fruits and fresh vegetables
dano ka otimmo bal mo manok myerro gitimme kica 	if a man has made a mistake he should be forgiven
ento wun wuwaco ni, ‘Ka dano mo owaco ki wonne nyo minne ni, Gin ma kono akonyi kwede en lim me Korban’ (te lokke ni, gin ma gimiyo ki Lubaŋa), 	But you say that if anyone declares that what might have been used to help their father or mother is Corban (that is, devoted to God)—
peny ka latin ngeyo 	ask or question whether the child knows 
Kit meno, utmega, wan pe litino pa aŋeca, ento wan litino pa dako kikome.	But what does Scripture say? “Get rid of the slave woman and her son, for the slave woman’s son will never share in the inheritance with the free woman’s son.”
otole maarro lot mada i otweg 	the elbow is the popular place where the bursa develops
babu myerro gijwayo iye cut cut ka gilwokke iye 	the bath should be scrubbed, as soon after as, it has been used
Ka dok owekogi ocito olego lubaŋa tyen me adekke, kun nwoyo lego lega acel-lu. 	So he left them and went away once more and prayed the third time, saying the same thing.
gwok beddo  	does not know how to sit well sits anyhow
otiyo tic maber twatwa 	he did an excellent job 
Gin gucako kumo cut, kun dano acel acel penye ni, “An bo?” 	They were saddened, and one by one they said to him, “Surely you don’t mean me?”
danone adam wiye rac	the man has a bad head
pe imugge mo manok pien, en lagoba 	do not tell or confide in him because he is a liar
Pi meno wan waneno ni, jo meno yam pe gutwero donyo pien onoŋo gukwero ye Lubaŋa.	So we see that they were not able to enter, because of their unbelief.
Pe ciŋa aye otiyo lwak jami-ni ducu?’ 	Has not my hand made all these things?’
ci myero iwek motti kunnu i nyim keno tyer, ci idok cen	leave your gift there in front of the altar
Okot dong tye ka pal apala 	Okot is getting thin and thinner or Okot is becoming more and more emaciated
Ento Petero dok ogamo matek twatwal ni, “Twara ma ato kacel kwedi, pe abikweri.” Gin ducu gucako loko kit meno bene. 	But Peter insisted emphatically, “Even if I have to die with you, I will never disown you.” And all the others said the same.
Gicoyo i buk pa lunebi ni, ‘Lubaŋa bipwonyogi ducu.’ Dano ducu ma owinyo lok ki bot Won, ce omako lokke, bino bota. 	“Stop grumbling among yourselves,” Jesus answered.
otung ki yito 	he was suffocated or chocked with smoke
giwirro moo i pal cwinynye me mime gum 	they smear his epigastrium to bless him 
ento Luparicayo ki lupwony-cik gukwero gin ma Lubaŋa oyubo pigi, pien nene pe gulimo batija ki bot Jon. 	But the Pharisees and the experts in the law rejected God’s purpose for themselves, because they had not been baptized by John.)
Bedo ber ka wuneno can pi timo gin maber, ka ce Lubaŋa mito kit meno, loyo ma wuneno can pi timo gin marac. 	keeping a clear conscience, so that those who speak maliciously against your good behavior in Christ may be ashamed of their slander.
Pi Kricito wan ducu, wan Lujudaya ki wun Lurok, giyabo botwa yo i Cwiny Maleŋ acel-li me o bot Lubaŋa Won. 	He came and preached peace to you who were far away and peace to those who were near.
Ci wun wubiwaco ni, ‘Yam wacamo dok wamato kacel kwedi, dok bene ipwonyo dano i dye gaŋwa.’ 	“Then you will say, ‘We ate and drank with you, and you taught in our streets.’
tic matek illo wic 	hard work makes one famous
Ento wun, luwota, kadi bed waloko kit man, wageno ni wutye maber ma wukato jo meno i lok ma dok i larre. 	Even though we speak like this, dear friends, we are convinced of better things in your case—the things that have to do with salvation.
Yecu ka owinyo ni giryeme woko, onoŋe, openye ni, “In iye Wod pa dano?” 	To this they replied, “You were steeped in sin at birth; how dare you lecture us!” And they threw him out.
“Ento wubineno can, wun lulonyo pien doŋ wutyeko gamo gin maber me kweyo cwinywu. 	“But woe to you who are rich, for you have already received your comfort.
ngorre wanggi otoo woko pien acwii omakko woko	this time the cowpeas did not grow well because they were infected by the beetle
ento man aŋa ma dok awinyo lok macalo magi i komeni?” Oparo pi nene twatwal. 	Who, then, is this I hear such things about?” And he tried to see him.
ocako turo dog adomo moone, ci oonyo i wiye. 	She broke the jar and poured the perfume on his head.
Preciden obinno ki motoka ma lik lik 	the President came in a limousine 
Wuyab waŋwu wunen gwogi-gu, ma gin lutim maraco, ma giŋolo dul kom dano woko-ni. 	Further, my brothers and sisters, rejoice in the Lord! It is no trouble for me to write the same things to you again, and it is a safeguard for you.
nngor alegi mit mada me amwodda ka gicello acella 	the large kind of cowpeas are very nice to eat when fried 
ci gibimiye i ciŋ Lurok wek guŋale, gupwode ki del	and will hand him over to the Gentiles to be mocked and flogged and crucified
lutkot ogoyo ot 	the house has been struck by the lightning 
Man bene aye tyen lok mumiyo wuculo mucoro, pien luloc gin lutic pa Lubaŋa ma gitiyo tic meno kikome. 	Therefore, it is necessary to submit to the authorities, not only because of possible punishment but also as a matter of conscience.
Yecu openyogi ni, “Piŋo cwinywu opoto? Piŋo wupennye kekenwu i cwinywu? 	They were startled and frightened, thinking they saw a ghost.
gwido lok ni put put	to talk persistently 
Pi tone i kom yatariya odwoko wan aryo ducu bot Lubaŋa i kom acel, omiyo mone ogik woko. 	For he himself is our peace, who has made the two groups one and has destroyed the barrier, the dividing wall of hostility,
Ka orumo coŋe piny, ci odaŋŋe ki dwane matek ni, “Rwot, pe iket bal man i komgi.” Ka otyeko lok kit man, ci oto.	Then he fell on his knees and cried out, “Lord, do not hold this sin against them.” When he had said this, he fell asleep.
Pien awacciwu ni, ka pe kitwu obedo atir makato kit lupwonycik ki pa Luparicayo, ci pe wubidonyo i ker me polo. 	For I tell you that unless your righteousness surpasses that of the Pharisees and the teachers of the law, you will certainly not enter the kingdom of heaven.
dok pi tito pi mwaka ma Rwot binyuto iye berre bot dano.” 	to proclaim the year of the Lord’s favor.”
litino gimaarro matto coda mada 	children love very much to drink sodas
owacci, ‘Ladit, onoŋo aŋeyo ni in dano magwa, ikayo ka ma yam pe icoyo iye kodi, icoko bene ka ma pe iketo	‘Master,’ he said, ‘I knew that you are a hard man, harvesting where you have not sown and gathering where you have not scattered seed.
Gua woko ki i nyim Lukiko ma onoŋo cwinygi yom pien Lubaŋa otamo ni gimyero pi dit man me noŋo lewic pi nyiŋ Yecu. 	The apostles left the Sanhedrin, rejoicing because they had been counted worthy of suffering disgrace for the Name.
Batija pa Jon twerone oa ki kwene? Oa ki i polo nyo ki bot dano?” Ci gucako pyem i kingi kekengi kun giwacci, “Ka wawacci, ‘Twer man oa ki i polo’, ci en bipenyowa ni, ‘Piŋo kono onoŋo pe wuye en?’ 	If you answer me, I will tell you by what authority I am doing these things.
citto ka rweene i cuk	to take for a walk to the market
tem doggola ki yat wek yamo pe obed ka yellone 	support the door with a piece of wood in order to prevent the wind from blowing it about
Ma kaka meno, dul kom maca ma gitamo ni goro mitte twatwal, 	On the contrary, those parts of the body that seem to be weaker are indispensable,
Ka Festo otyeko poro lok ki lukikone, odok iye ni, “Ibolo pi Cecar	After Festus had conferred with his council, he declared: “You have appealed to Caesar
Lamalaika mukene me aryone dok olubo kor lawote, kun wacci, “Babilon madit doŋ opoto, opoto gire woko, en gaŋ ma yam omiyo rok ducu mato koŋo vino me timme me tarwaŋ-ŋi.” 	A second angel followed and said, “‘Fallen! Fallen is Babylon the Great,’ which made all the nations drink the maddening wine of her adulteries.”
Pi meno wucuk cwinywu kekenwu, dok wukonnye bene kekenwu wek wudoŋ i cwinywu, ŋat acel acel okony lawote me doŋo, kit macalo wutye ka timone-ni. 	Therefore encourage one another and build each other up, just as in fact you are doing.
tyenne obanne 	he has knock knees 
awobe gubinno ma gutweyo okoco woko i kom badgi, in agaa ma ilokko kwcdgi? 	the boys came with the tortoise shells tied around their arms, who are you, to speak with them?
woko ki botwa kany ci olwii ocitto woko 	he slipped away from us here and escaped
Doŋ wuyeŋ woko! Doŋ wudoko lulonyo bene! Doŋ bene wudoko luker, kadi bed wan pe luker! Atikane kono, onoŋo wamito ni wudok luker, wek wan bene wabed luker kacel kwedwu. 	Already you have all you want! Already you have become rich! You have begun to reign—and that without us! How I wish that you really had begun to reign so that we also might reign with you!
pii ma ngic oo kom latin ci cet otunggi katti woko ni nyul ki i gwinynye 	cold water poured on the child and suddenly the stool came out from his bottom 
wan dong wanynywakke kacel me citto Kampala 	we will go together with you to Kampala 
gikwanynnyo kiga me owoo tungu en aye gicweyo kwedde aduku ki odero 	reeds from the leaves of the borasuss palm are the ones which are taken and used for making baskets and winnowers
Jo mukene onoŋo giyenyo lanyut ki bote ma a ki i polo, pi teme. 	Others tested him by asking for a sign from heaven.
ot menynye maber ki mac tara 	a house is well illuminated by kerosene lamp 
gin ma omiyo wun pe wuwinyo, pien pe wua bot Lubaŋa.” 	Whoever belongs to God hears what God says
ento en ocito i kacokke, olaro lok ki Lujudaya. 	He himself went into the synagogue and reasoned with the Jews.
lacaka caka 	it a sauce made of a mixture of cowpeas leaves with pounded raw simsim or raw groundnuts and then cooked, it makes very appetising vegetable sauce 
gitye ka rette ni nang nang caa 	they are throwing down each other or wrestling there
Lubaŋa onoŋo doŋ otyeko yere wa con, ma pud pe oketo guti me lobo, ka dok onyute woko piwu i kare man, ma en aye kare me agikki. 	but with the precious blood of Christ, a lamb without blemish or defect.
pien awaco botwu ni, nia koni pe dok abimato pig olok nio waŋ ma ker pa Lubaŋa obino.” 	For I tell you I will not drink again from the fruit of the vine until the kingdom of God comes.”
dano ducu gucito ka genggo gee Otto i kom lok me pkido ikomme 	all people went to stand for Otto in the case against him
baone wingge woko oyot oyot ka giketto i wii ceng malyet 	the wood bends easily if left in a hot sun 
omiinigi pwoc madit pi kony ma gumiine 	he thanked them very much for helping him
Ka Petero oo i dog ot, ci Kornelio oromo kwede, opoto oryebbe piny i te tyene kun wore. 	As Peter entered the house, Cornelius met him and fell at his feet in reverence.
latin tye ka ywayo pyen i dyee ot ni wuru wuru 	the child is dragging the dried hide on the floor with that dull sound 
lee opec mada kany 	there are many animals here or the animals are plenty here
Ot ducu ma wudonyo iye, wukwoŋ waco ni, ‘Kuc obed i ot man.’ 	“When you enter a house, first say, ‘Peace to this house.’
pim bongo pa latin man wek i kwoo 	measure this child and make clothes for him
ting latin ci ento pe i ret piny	take the child but do not throw her down
wet wunu bet dano ma pat pat ci wujog cente botgi 	go to various people and collect cents from them
daba ma oponggo wang it twerro gwadde 	the mud that has filled up the water well can be removed
kare ma gityekko i kilaci ma gipwonynyo iye pwony i i cukul, i kolej ki i yunibaciti 	period of time during which the classes are held at school, college, and university
joo ma guporre aye gibicitto i wii polo 	only the holy ones who will go to heaven
Man omiyo alego ni, kit ribbe ma waribbe wan kwedi i kom niye odok matek ma romo niaŋowa matut i kom gin maber ducu ma watye kwede i Kricito. 	because I hear about your love for all his holy people and your faith in the Lord Jesus.
Ka nino aboro doŋ oromo me liro latin, gicako nyiŋe Yecu, nyiŋ ma lamalaika yam ocako ka en pud peya tye i ic. 	On the eighth day, when it was time to circumcise the child, he was named Jesus, the name the angel had given him before he was conceived.
Pien Rwot pwonyo jo ma en maro, pwodo latin acel acel ma en gamo.” 	because the Lord disciplines the one he loves, and he chastens everyone he accepts as his son.”
ŋat mo pe ma ŋeyo ni Wod en aŋa, kono Wod keken, dok bene ŋat mo pe ma ŋeyo ni Wod en aŋa, kono Won keken, ki ŋat ma Wod oyero me nyuto Won bote.” 	No one knows who the Son is except the Father, and no one knows who the Father is except the Son and those to whom the Son chooses to reveal him.”
wacittu ka lyerre i align ligo 	let us go to swing on the hanging rope
an dong aol woko ki tic 	I am tired of work
bedo obedde atyak rac ku palabek ocok tugi	the sorghum is long enough, atyak are not bad in saying palabek should return to their home
dongge tye ka roone ki kalara 	his mouth is being irritated by red pepper
Lonyo dit twatwal i dini ka ce iyeŋ ki gin mo keken ma itye kwede. 	and constant friction between people of corrupt mind, who have been robbed of the truth and who think that godliness is a means to financial gain.
Ento Yecu odokke iye ni, “Dano mo yam otedo karama madit, olwoŋo iye jo mapol. 	Jesus replied: “A certain man was preparing a great banquet and invited many guests.
wek wubed ki teko, ki cwiny me niaŋ, kacel ki jo pa Lubaŋa ducu, kit ma mar pa Kricito lac kwede, kit mabor kwede, ki kit ma odoŋo kwede malo, dok kit ma tut kwede, 	I pray that out of his glorious riches he may strengthen you with power through his Spirit in your inner being,
Ka doŋ gicere ki i kin jo muto, lupwonnyene gupo ni yam owaco lok man	But the temple he had spoken of was his body.
danone maarro punno dano mada 	the man loves very much cheating people
pal latinne pien tye ka dangge twatwal	slap the child because she is shouting too much
itimme callo ngat ma tye ki cen 	you behave as though you are possessed by the evil spirit
medde i cit anyim 	go further forward
Ŋat acel i kin jo aryo ma yam guwinyo Jon kun loko, ci gulubo Yecu, onoŋo Anderiya, omin Cimon Petero. 	It was about four in the afternoon.
Ada awaco botwu ni, bal ducu ma dano timo, ki lok ducu ma giyeto kwede Lubaŋa, gibiwekone woko, 	Truly I tell you, people can be forgiven all their sins and every slander they utter,
gkiotte pi bappo lem latin 	he was accused of slapping the child's cheek 
Ka lwak guneno Yecu, guuro en mada, gutwarre oyotoyot guriŋo ka mote. 	As soon as all the people saw Jesus, they were overwhelmed with wonder and ran to greet him.
Oonyo pii i becen, ci ocako lwoko tyen lupwonnye, ojwayo ki taulo ma otweyo i pyere. 	so he got up from the meal, took off his outer clothing, and wrapped a towel around his waist.
rokke rok Acholi 	his tribe is Acholi
ringo otop ma dong gwee mada 	the meat is rotten and it stinks or smells badly 
peyo lawangge otoo ki odoo	to lead the blind man with a stick
Pien maro lim en aye acakki me gin maraco ducu	Those who want to get rich fall into temptation and a trap and into many foolish and harmful desires that plunge people into ruin and destruction.
Ocikogi ni, “Pe wuwot ki gin mo, kadi ki odoo, kadi kicaa, kadi kwon, kadi lim, dok pe wubed ki kanyi aryo. 	He told them: “Take nothing for the journey—no staff, no bag, no bread, no money, no extra shirt.
Gupenye ni, “Dako, ikok piŋo?” Odok iye ki gin ni, “Gikwanyo Rwoda woko, pe aŋeyo ka ma gikete iye.” 	and saw two angels in white, seated where Jesus’ body had been, one at the head and the other at the foot.
Ci mon gukatti woko ki i lyel, gucako ŋwec ki myelkom pi lworo ma omakogi matek twatwal	Trembling and bewildered, the women went out and fled from the tomb
Lacen Yecu owaco bot ajwagi madito pa Lubaŋa ki ludito pa askari me ot pa Lubaŋa, ki ludoŋo ma gubino i kome, ni, “Wubino i koma ki pala lucwan ki odoo-gu me maka macalo wubino i kom layak mo? 	Then Jesus said to the chief priests, the officers of the temple guard, and the elders, who had come for him, “Am I leading a rebellion, that you have come with swords and clubs?
Ka kono nene gubedo ka tamo pi lobo ma yam gin gua ki iye ca, kono gunoŋo yo me dok cen iye. 	If they had been thinking of the country they had left, they would have had opportunity to return.
Yecu odok iye botgi ni, “Lurem lanyom twero ri kec ma kun lanyom tye kwedgi? Pi kare ducu ma lanyom tye kwedgi pe gitwero ri kec. 	Jesus answered, “How can the guests of the bridegroom fast while he is with them? They cannot, so long as they have him with them.
Kit meno bene, wun mon wumine me bedo i te loc pa cogwu, wek ka ce co mogo i kingi pe gilubo lok pa Lubaŋa, ci gitwero lokke pi kit pa mongi, kadi bed gin kikomgi pe giloko lok mo ki doggi, 	but the word of the Lord endures forever.” And this is the word that was preached to you.
tut myerro pe gut i bur ka gibarro maber 	the pus should not remain in the cavity if the swelling was opened well 
Laparicayo ouro ka oneno ni ocako cam ma pe koŋ ologo ciŋe. 	Then the Lord said to him, “Now then, you Pharisees clean the outside of the cup and dish, but inside you are full of greed and wickedness.
jami ma kiteno mitte me beddo tye i cukul	it is necessary to have such things in the school 
pien ka ma agoro iye, kenyo en aye ka ma atek iye. 	That is why, for Christ’s sake, I delight in weaknesses, in insults, in hardships, in persecutions, in difficulties
Wuleg Lubaŋa ma pe wukeŋ. 	pray continually,
pe item nyeddo lok kany, cit inyed ki gangwu kuno 	don't try to speak sarcastically here, go and speak it at your home there 
lee pa Jeremel onongo gwa mada 	Germany rule was very cruel or the governance of the Germans was very cruel 
odig maarro nen twatwal i kom litino	nosebleeding occur frequently in children
Lupwonnye gumako lok meno, gubedo ka penye kekengi ni, “Cer ki i kin jo muto kono te lokke aŋo?” 	They kept the matter to themselves, discussing what “rising from the dead” meant.
kal gioddo i pany ki lalekke 	millet is pounded in a mortar with a pestle
“Wutye ki gum ka dano dagwu, ka ce gityemowu woko ki i kingi, ka giŋalowu, ka gicayo nyiŋwu ni rac, pi Wod pa dano! 	Blessed are you when people hate you, when they exclude you and insult you and reject your name as evil, because of the Son of Man.
man iwaco kakare.” 	The fact is, you have had five husbands, and the man you now have is not your husband
bongo man mono ki in me rukkone 	this cloth is unsuitable for you to wear
nyom maleng en aye me ribbe i kanica	matrimony is the wedding in the church
onekke nono 	he killed him for nothing 
Omiyo Juda oye, ci oyenyo kare maber ma myero emiye kwede botgi ma noŋo lwak pe. 	He consented, and watched for an opportunity to hand Jesus over to them when no crowd was present.
Yecu ogamo ni, “Ka aloko marac, nyut caden me gin marac	Surely they know what I said.”
Mumiyo gudok iye bot Yecu ni, “Pe waŋeyo.” Yecu bene owaco botgi ni, “An bene pe abitito kit twer mumiyo atiyo gin magi. 	John’s baptism—where did it come from? Was it from heaven, or of human origin?” They discussed it among themselves and said, “If we say, ‘From heaven,’ he will ask, ‘Then why didn’t you believe him?’
Ka doŋ owaco lok man, ci onyuto ciŋe ki tyene botgi.] 	He said to them, “Why are you troubled, and why do doubts rise in your minds?
latinne mal ata 	the child roams about aimlessly 
arum tuk ki bwome ni wako wako 	the ground hornbill fly with flapping wings
rwee bogi man ducu maber 	iron all these clothes very well 
nyiggo waraga maber mada 	writes very fine and neat letter
mokone tika pwot? pe abongo ka kit pwotte 	is the flour smooth,? no I did not feel its smoothness
cudde kekeni pe ber, gin marac mada	committing suicide is very bad 
cap ma latin nyakoni orukko nen ber mada 	the necklace worn by the girl looks very pretty 
Lwak gujuke matek ni oliŋ, ento en omedde ameda ki daŋŋe ni, “Lakwar Daudi, timma kica ba!” 	Many rebuked him and told him to be quiet, but he shouted all the more, “Son of David, have mercy on me!”
yanggo dano gin matek mada 	to operate on the people is very difficult
lwet mabocco kano kwkii i teere 	long nails keep germs underneath
twon oluma lyee 	a very big elephant
panggo wii latin woko ki i kom dini 	diverting the child away from religion 
Gin ducu yam gucamo cam acel me cwiny, 	They all ate the same spiritual food
Kit meno lwak muye Kricito i kabedo acel acel gumoko matek i niye, gubedo ka medde mapol nino ducu. 	So the churches were strengthened in the faith and grew daily in numbers.
“Lapwony, Moses yam ocoyo ni, ka laco mo oto woko, ce oweko dakone, ma kun pe obwoto latin mo, ci myero ominne olak dakone, wek onywal kwede litino ka wi ominne. 	“Teacher,” they said, “Moses wrote for us that if a man’s brother dies and leaves a wife but no children, the man must marry the widow and raise up offspring for his brother.
twon gweno lworo labuce	a cock fears the cock which removes its feathers
kidi me pakko lyedi tye kwene? 	where is the whet-stone for sharpening the razor?
tol twerro roone i libirane 	threads can be threaded into the needle 
Ka ceŋ oryeny, owaŋogi gutwo woko, pien lwitgi pe odonyo matut. 	But when the sun came up, the plants were scorched, and they withered because they had no root.
dakoni komme dong tye ka tal atalla 	this woman's body is drying up, that is, she is getting thin and thinner and the skin of the body is not smooth and moist anymore
abwollo larema ni pe obin i ceng abicel pien nongo ape, abwollo kitmeno pien tye gin ma amino tiyo ne twatwal i paco kenyuyo mape dok amitti gatti mo obin obal woko	I deceived my friend that he should not come on Saturday because I shall not be there, I deceived him like that because there was something that I really want to do it at home and therefore I do not want anybody to come to spoil it
Doŋ coc ma yam gicoyo i ginacoya waco lok aŋo? Ginacoya waco ni, “Abraim onoŋo oye Lubaŋa, mumiyo kikwane ni en dano ma kite atir.” 	If, in fact, Abraham was justified by works, he had something to boast about—but not before God.
yer kom gunya odin ni yuk 	the chimpanzee has dense long hair 
bed piny i ngom 	sit down on the ground
puc nen mada i kor ki i gut 	warts are frequently seen on the chest and the neck 
en myello maber mada 	she dances very well 
Dano ma gitye ka pwonyo ki lok i kom Kricito myero onywak jami ducu mabeco ma etye kwede ki ŋat ma pwonye. 	for each one should carry their own load.
opego en aye lee ma cammo jami ducu ata macallo ogwal ki okoro ki mukene 	pigs are animals that eat anything for instance, frogs, crabs, and others
miyo ka Lakwat madit binen, wun wubinoŋo mot, lalukana me deyo ma pe balle. 	Be shepherds of God’s flock that is under your care, watching over them—not because you must, but because you are willing, as God wants you to be; not pursuing dishonest gain, but eager to serve;
Pien wun aye wubedo deyowa ki yomcwinywa.	Indeed, you are our glory and joy.
cok ngide matitinoni me ringo man, ci iteer ited ki litinoni 	collect these pieces of meat, take and cook them for these children
kac, meno agikki piny, lukac aye lumalaika. 	The harvest is the end of the age, and the harvesters are angels.
jalle dong okil i ticce 	the fellow is now an expert in his work
Lok man lok ada, ni, “Ka wato kwede, wabikwo kwede bene, 	Therefore I endure everything for the sake of the elect, that they too may obtain the salvation that is in Christ Jesus, with eternal glory.
mec werro beddo mecca, mecci, mecce 	the clandestine friend can be mine, yours or his 
Gin ma waneno kombeddi cal ki tipo ma nen ribiribi i kiyo	For now we see only a reflection as in a mirror; then we shall see face to face
ludito kanica ka gubinno kalega, gibeddo wii abam	when the clergies come to pray, they sit on the platform 
lyel meno onoŋo yam obedo boro got, ma giloro doge ki got. 	Jesus, once more deeply moved, came to the tomb
wii deroni twerro ille 	the cover of this granary can be lifted
Ci askari gutito lok man bot luŋolkop, ci gubedo ki lworo ka guwinyo ni gin Luroma. 	The officers reported this to the magistrates, and when they heard that Paul and Silas were Roman citizens, they were alarmed.
maar menu ki woru 	love your mother and father
lokke doki gitem tem katto pa lwotte 	his speech is better or preferable than that ot his companion
Wuwiny ba, utmegina ma amaro, pe Lubaŋa aye muyero jo ma lucan i wi lobo wek gubed lulonyo i niye, dok me miyogi ker ma yam ociko ni ebimiyo bot jo ma mare? 	Listen, my dear brothers and sisters: Has not God chosen those who are poor in the eyes of the world to be rich in faith and to inherit the kingdom he promised those who love him?
yer gut labwor 	mane of a lion
jamine pol mada 	he has many things 
Jo ducu ma gibedo i lobo pa Lugeraca ma orumo kunnu gulego Yecu ni myero oa woko ki botgi, pien onoŋo lworo omakogi matek	Then all the people of the region of the Gerasenes asked Jesus to leave them, because they were overcome with fear
Ka Lurok ki Lujudaya guyutte kacel ki lulocgi pi bino ka timogi marac ki celogi ki got, 	There was a plot afoot among both Gentiles and Jews, together with their leaders, to mistreat them and stone them.
ento gin ma myero wamoki en aye pe me tiyo gin mo ma bimiyo ominwa yokke nyo poto i bal. 	Therefore let us stop passing judgment on one another
Ento kare bibino ma gibikwanyo lanyom woko ki botgi, ka doŋ gibiri i kare meno. 	But the time will come when the bridegroom will be taken from them, and on that day they will fast.
Ŋat ma ite tye myero owiny lok ma Cwiny Maleŋ oloko bot lwak ducu ma guye an.’ 	Whoever has ears, let them hear what the Spirit says to the churches.
Dok aneno ginanyuta mo mukene madit i polo, ma obedo bene me aura mada, gin lumalaika abiro ma gitye ki gemo abiro. Magi gin aye doŋ gemo me agikkine, pien gin aye gimiyo akemo pa Lubaŋa cobbe kakare. 	I saw in heaven another great and marvelous sign: seven angels with the seven last plagues—last, because with them God’s wrath is completed.
labwor ma kok pe mako lee	a roaring lion does not catch any animal
Dok pe tye ŋatti mo ma piko koŋo vino manyen i kicaa macon	Otherwise, they will have torn the new garment, and the patch from the new will not match the old.
wan pe wamitto lok gama gama kany 	we do not want impulsive talk here
pur pe gin ma yot, ka pe kiiyo cwinynyi matek pe itwerro purro poto madit 	cultivation is not an easy thing, if you are not determined, you cannot cultivate a large field
ka pe icwallo candukke anget ci gette woko i doggola 	if you do not push the box by the side it will get stuck 
I kare meno ajwagi madito pa Lubaŋa ki ludoŋo pa lwak gucokke i gaŋ kal pa ajwaka madit pa Lubaŋa, ma nyiŋe Kayapa, 	Then the chief priests and the elders of the people assembled in the palace of the high priest, whose name was Caiaphas,
nyenye nyaa mada i ot kace cam oo i dye ot, mape giyweyog, dok wii cam bene pe giummo 	the cockroaches flourish very easily in a house where lots of pieces of food drop on the floor and are not swept and where food is not covered
Lwak gucuŋ kun gineno	The people stood watching, and the rulers even sneered at him
ginynyo wang twatwal kello lit wang 	rubbing the eyes frequently with the hand causes eye illness 
Ka jo ma onoŋo gucuŋ kunnu guwinyo lokke, ci guwacci, “Winyu ka en lwoŋo Elia ca.” 	When some of those standing near heard this, they said, “Listen, he’s calling Elijah.”
leyo wii wonne  	succeeding his father
cwinynye mitto 	he likes it 
Pe kumeno! Ka tye kit meno, ci Lubaŋa twero ŋolo kop i kom dano ma gibedo i wi lobo niŋniŋ? 	But if our unrighteousness brings out God’s righteousness more clearly, what shall we say? That God is unjust in bringing his wrath on us? (I am using a human argument.)
pig wangge ongoo woko  	he was about to shed tears
Laco mo ma nyiŋe Demetrio latet ryal, yam teto ryal timo kwede cal jok ma dako ma nyiŋe Atemi ci kelo kwede lim madwoŋ bot ludiro tic. 	A silversmith named Demetrius, who made silver shrines of Artemis, brought in a lot of business for the craftsmen there.
en bio gang awene? 	when will he arrive home? 
lak kweri pe to nono	the blade of the hoe does not wear out for  nothing
twol marro cammo lagwee mada  	the lizard has a shiny slippery skin 
Pien pe aloko pira kena: Won ma oora, en kikome aye omiya cik, i gin ma myero awaci ki ma myero aloki. 	For I did not come to judge the world, but to save the world.
kiniga okello jaar ler i gutte 	anger brought the blood vessels to stand out visibly in his neck
Ka ladit ma loyo askari otyeko niaŋo en, ci omiyo kom Yecu bot Yucepu. 	When he learned from the centurion that it was so, he gave the body to Joseph.
kel mucumar wek aguur i kom ot me ngabbo cal meera 	bring me a nail so that I may nail it on the wall to hang my picture
Pyem bene ocakke i kin lupwonnye ni aŋa i kingi ma gitamo ni bedo ladit. 	A dispute also arose among them as to which of them was considered to be greatest.
I wer dong rommo ma awerro 	the song which I have sung is enough, I am tired of singing
ci wugony, wukel kany. 	Untie it and bring it here.
ka okwaca okok ci nyutte ni guu nyo gin mager tye inyimwu 	when hunting if the okwaca bird cries, it means danger, that, a wild beast is in front of you
gwet twol ma otooni ki tal wek ibol i bur  	remove the dead snake with a long stick and throw it into a hole
Ento gin mo ma kome keni pe bidonyo iye, kadi ki ŋat mo ma timo gin me kwer, nyo gin me goba, ento kono jo ma nyiŋgi doŋ gicoyo woko i buk me kwo-ni keken.	Nothing impure will ever enter it, nor will anyone who does what is shameful or deceitful, but only those whose names are written in the Lamb’s book of life.
giwacci Onek en layir wang dano ci too woko 	it is said that Onek is a person who bewitches the eyes of the people and they become blind 
litino gucello wang dirica me cukul gutyerro woko ki lacuur 	the children broke the school windows with the stone that they shot from their slings
pi gweg ma gionynyo i yoo omiyo obeddo gaki gaki 	for the stones which have been poured on the road made it still coarse or rough
wa i kare man joo karimojog bene pod matto wotto munero 	up to this time the Karimojong still want to walk naked
gee nyang obeddo gara-gara 	the back of the crocodile is rough
Lubaŋa Won Rwotwa Yecu Kricito, ma gipwoyo nakanaka, en ŋeyo ni pe aloko goba. 	If I must boast, I will boast of the things that show my weakness.
Jami ducu doŋ Wora otyeko miyogi woko bota	“All things have been committed to me by my Father
ruk waar macol wek orwatte ki cutini 	put on a black pair of shoes to match with your suit
latuny tong gweno en aye girubbo me teddo kek 	the egg yolk is the one that is mixed for making cake
guwekko gweyo odilo i kare ma piny dong odokko ribi ribi 	they left playing football at dusk
ngii kommi ki koyo 	get used to cold experience 
Doŋ in dano ma iŋolo kop i kom jo mukene ma gitimo gin macalo meno-ni, kun in kikomi bene itimo, itamo ni ibibwot ki ŋolo kop pa Lubaŋa? 	Now we know that God’s judgment against those who do such things is based on truth.
gwinyo oonynyo i komme 	he has got scabies
cany gwok 	hit the dog  
bok ringone mayom ka dong icel nyo ital 	boil the meat until it is very soft and then fry or roast it
iyee lok me canna ne 	you have accepted his courtship
Lujudaya dok gukwanyo got me cele. 	I and the Father are one.”
Piŋo ineno cuŋ kal ma tye i waŋ omeru, ento dul yat ma tye i waŋi in kikomi pe ineno? 	For in the same way you judge others, you will be judged, and with the measure you use, it will be measured to you.
Lurok gibinyono Jerucalem piny, nio ka kare pa Lurok ocobo kakare. 	Jerusalem will be trampled on by the Gentiles until the times of the Gentiles are fulfilled.
Cwinya yom twatwal me noŋo ni litinoni mogo gilubo lok me ada i kit ma yam Lubaŋa Won ocikowa kwede. 	Grace, mercy and peace from God the Father and from Jesus Christ, the Father’s Son, will be with us in truth and love.
raa yen ma titino ikel me moko mac 	collect twigs and bring them for lighting the fire
pik tyen leela  	inflate the bicycle tyre
ting latin wek wucit kwedde woko ka tukko 	take the child and go with him out to play
Jo ma kelo kuc gicoyo kodigi i kuc me nyako kit ma atir.	Peacemakers who sow in peace reap a harvest of righteousness.
kado i dekke bit 	the food is bitter because of too much salt in it
Dano ma pe lubo cik pa Moses gineko aneka laboŋo kica mo, ka ce lok oloye i nyim caden aryo nyo adek. 	Anyone who rejected the law of Moses died without mercy on the testimony of two or three witnesses.
gem gengogi binno ka cam kacel ki dano 	greed prevents them from coming to share food with other people 
pe iyel litino 	do not trouble the children 
wotte tye diki 	his journey will be tomorrow
Yam acoyo botwu waraga kun pig waŋa cwer madwoŋ twatwal pi cwercwiny ki kumo ma abedo kwede, pe pi cwero cwinywu, ento wek omi wuŋe mar madit ma atye kwede i komwu. 	For if I grieve you, who is left to make me glad but you whom I have grieved?
Polo donggo 	not growing well but stunted 
I kare ma Yecu doŋ oa ki i wi got olor piny, lwak dano mapol gulube. 	But seek first his kingdom and his righteousness, and all these things will be given to you as well.
gin mo pe woko li weng i ot tin me atedda	there is completely nothing to cook in the house
Pien pe odonyo wa i cwinye, ento wok kato i cin iye, ci kato woko.” (Ka otyeko wacone ki meno, nyuto ni olonyo kwa cam ducu.) 	For it doesn’t go into their heart but into their stomach, and then out of the body.” (In saying this, Jesus declared all foods clean.)
Giloko lok mogo maditodito me wakke ma tere pe, kun gibito ki dano ma pud gibwot abwota ki i kin jo ma kitgi obedo atata, ka giterogi i timo abor-gu kun gilubo mit me kom. 	For they mouth empty, boastful words and, by appealing to the lustful desires of the flesh, they entice people who are just escaping from those who live in error.
pien otamo ni, “Ka agudo kadi kom ginarukane keken, ci abicaŋ.” 	because she thought, “If I just touch his clothes, I will be healed.”
Lupwonnyene gupenye ni, “Lapwony, aŋa ma obalo, laco man, kece nyo jo ma gunywale, ma omiyo ginywale ma waŋe oto?” 	As he went along, he saw a man blind from birth.
temme me kwan matek 	try to read very hard by yourself
Gubino i ot pa ladit me kacokke, Yecu oneno lwak ma giwo, kun gikok ma gidaŋŋe matek. 	When they came to the home of the synagogue leader, Jesus saw a commotion, with people crying and wailing loudly.
Yecu yam maro marita ki laminne ki Lajaro. 	So the sisters sent word to Jesus, “Lord, the one you love is sick.”
yommo luwotte i ngwec 	surpassing his friends in running 
cakko tic pe yot 	starting to work is not easy 
gitye ka jwatte pi lok mo matkii ikingi gin aryo  	they are fighting one another with sticks over some small problems between the two of them
cki kom agulu 	blacken the body of the pot with the black dye 
Ka Yecu oŋeyo tamgi, ci owaco botgi ni. “Ka ker iye opokke aryo, ker meno lobone balle woko, ki gaŋ bene nyo ot ka opokke iye aryo pe twero cuŋ.	But when the Pharisees heard this, they said, “It is only by Beelzebul, the prince of demons, that this fellow drives out demons.”
Dano ma tye ki Cwiny pa Lubaŋa ŋeyo pimo jami ducu, ento ŋat mo pe ma ŋolo kop i kome. 	The person with the Spirit makes judgments about all things, but such a person is not subject to merely human judgments,
I kare ma onoŋo en tye ka lega, waŋe olokke mapat, ginarukane odoko matar ma ryeny lidaŋdaŋ. 	As he was praying, the appearance of his face changed, and his clothes became as bright as a flash of lightning.
latinni dong gammo twatwal	the child is yawning too much
Koni cwinywu cwer, ento abinenowu doki, ci cwinywu bibedo yom, pe tye ŋat mo ma bikwanyo yomcwinywu ki botwu. 	You will grieve, but your grief will turn to joy.
i caa ducu en tye ka lwiyo 	all the time he is whistling 
mitti madowong twatwal me mon omiyo ononggo twoo jonynyo woko 	excessive desire for women made him to get AIDS
i cukul pud tye iye coron ma ginyogno iye anyogga 	in the schools there are still squatting lavatories
Pe, gin ma awaco en ene ni, gitum ma jo ma pe ŋeyo Lubaŋa gutyero, gityero bot jogi, ento pe gityero bot Lubaŋa. Pe amito wuribbe ki jogi. 	No, but the sacrifices of pagans are offered to demons, not to God, and I do not want you to be participants with demons.
obwotto matto kongo woko  	he left drinking alcohol
gitye ka cimmo kama dege pyee iye 	they are pointing at the place where the aeroplane lands
gupiyo dul yat obwolo matek ci mac omwoc iye 	they rubbed very hard a piece of obwolo tree and fire came out of it
Ci gulwoŋogi gucikogi ni pe gutit kadi pwonyo lok mo i nyiŋ Yecu kadi matidi mo. 	Then they called them in again and commanded them not to speak or teach at all in the name of Jesus.
Lok man atittiwu wek yomcwinya obed i iwu, wek wupoŋ ki yomcwiny. 	If you keep my commands, you will remain in my love, just as I have kept my Father’s commands and remain in his love.
tin gulunynye mada i rette 	they thoroughly threw each other down in wrestling today
put wunnu pul woko matye i poto tin 	uproot the groundnuts from the field today 
cit ka Iwok 	go to take a bath 
tunggo lokke woko ci pe dong lokko gin mo 	he suppressed his thoughts and therefore he did not say anything
dano mapol ducu dong nino lye ka nurru wanggi 	most of the people are now feeling sleepy 
guuro pwonnye, pien oloko ki twero. 	They were amazed at his teaching, because his words had authority.
deyone oryeny ocaro wi lobo ducu. 	He had great authority, and the earth was illuminated by his splendor.
pe wujem citto ka legga 	don't rebel against going to prayer 
dano pe gumeddi ngeyo kit ka yacce 	people did not know about her pregnancy 
olik gucammo labolo ma ononggo ocek i poto woko 	the bats ate the bananas, which were ripe in the field
En ocako a malo, otiŋo kabutone oyotoyot, ocito woko ki i nyimgi	He got up, took his mat and walked out in full view of them all
remo tye ka cweer i umme 	his nose is bleeding 
“Gitye ki gum jo ma kec ki orwo pii nekogi pi bedo jo ma kitgi atir, pien gibimiyo giyeŋ. 	Blessed are those who hunger and thirst for righteousness, for they will be filled.
Ojul ojul mada pi woo ma dano guwoo iwiye i kare matye ka lok 	Ojul was very much annoyed at the people who shouted at him when he was speaking
an anywalli me Kenya 	I am a Kenyan citizen
Gicikogi ni pe gubal lum me lobo, kadi gin ma twi atwiya, nyo yat mo, ento guket can i kom jo ma pe ki lanyut pa Lubaŋa i tur nyimgi. 	They were told not to harm the grass of the earth or any plant or tree, but only those people who did not have the seal of God on their foreheads.
Ka nino me Pentekote doŋ oromo, onoŋo gin ducu gucokke kacel i kabedo acel. 	When the day of Pentecost came, they were all together in one place.
dakono nino ducu beddo ki abar-wic-leela ka tye ki kwer	that woman always has migraine or severe headache whenever she has menstruation
Kadi bed kumeno, kare ducu en bedo ki cadenne ma nyuto ni en tye. En otimowu ber kun cwalo botwu kot mucwer ki i polo, dok miyowu kit cam mapatpat ma cek ka karegi oromo ma miyo wuyeŋ ki cam, cwinywu bene bedo yom.” 	Yet he has not left himself without testimony: He has shown kindness by giving you rain from heaven and crops in their seasons; he provides you with plenty of food and fills your hearts with joy.”
I kom cawa aboŋwen Yecu odaŋŋe ki dwan maloŋo ni, “Eloi, Eloi, lama cabaktani?” ma te lokke ni, “Lubaŋana, Lubaŋana, itenya woko piŋo?” 	And at three in the afternoon Jesus cried out in a loud voice, “Eloi, Eloi, lema sabachthani?” (which means “My God, my God, why have you forsaken me?”).
twoddo dyegi woko i otgi ki odiko con 	surrounding the goats in their sleeping place early in the morning
opotto i pii ni cullu 	fell into the water with a loud plop
lak latong obam woko 	the edge of the axe teeth is deformed
pe ber me beddo ki mec ma in pud latin kwan 	it is not good to have a secret sexual girlfriend while you are still a school boy
Yecu ogamo ni, “Cawa me dyeceŋ pe apar wiye aryo? Ka ŋatti mo woto i dyeceŋ, pe yokke, pien neno ceŋ me lobo man. 	“But Rabbi,” they said, “a short while ago the Jews there tried to stone you, and yet you are going back?”
I kare ma dok i lobogi, obedo i gadigadine kun kwano buk pa lanebi Icaya. 	and on his way home was sitting in his chariot reading the Book of Isaiah the prophet.
Amiyowu cik manyen, ni, wumarre kekenwu	If God is glorified in him, God will glorify the Son in himself, and will glorify him at once.
aparro citto i Amerika 	I long to go to America
I calle kadi bed en Lubaŋa kikome, ento pe oridde ki tek me bedo rom ki Lubaŋa. 	In your relationships with one another, have the same mindset as Christ Jesus:
Gubedo kunnu pi kare malac kun giloko pi Rwot ki tekcwiny laboŋo lworo, Rwot bene omiyogi twero me tiyo lanyut ki taŋo mapol ma omoko kwede lok ma gitito i kom kicane. 	So Paul and Barnabas spent considerable time there, speaking boldly for the Lord, who confirmed the message of his grace by enabling them to perform signs and wonders.
Tye ŋat mo i kin jo ma nene acwalogi botwu-ni, ma obuyo gin mo ki botwu pira? 	How were you inferior to the other churches, except that I was never a burden to you? Forgive me this wrong!
Lacen ladit ma en aye karan me gaŋ ojuko dano ci owaco botgi ni, “Wun jo Epeco, aŋa ma pe ŋeyo ni gaŋ Epeco aye lagwok ot woro Atemi madit, ki got maleŋ ma yam opoto ki i polo-ni? 	The city clerk quieted the crowd and said: “Fellow Ephesians, doesn’t all the world know that the city of Ephesus is the guardian of the temple of the great Artemis and of her image, which fell from heaven?
meno gire gin ma a ki bot Lubaŋa. 	without being frightened in any way by those who oppose you
Pien mitina ki genna madwoŋ tye ni, lewic pe bimaka i gin mo, ento atamo me miyo deyo bot Kricito i koma-ni ki tekcwiny madwoŋ, i kare-ni macalo i kare ducu, kadi akwo nyo kadi ato. 	for I know that through your prayers and God’s provision of the Spirit of Jesus Christ what has happened to me will turn out for my deliverance.
mumiyo gukato ki i Micia, gucito piny i Teroa. 	So they passed by Mysia and went down to Troas.
teerre kenne ka tukko odilo	to take himself by his own means to the football match 
Lamalaika obino bote, omote ni, “Itye ba, in ma gimiyi gum! Rwot tye kwedi! 	The angel went to her and said, “Greetings, you who are highly favored! The Lord is with you.”
Dano madit ma loyo ki i kinwu aye bibedo laticwu. 	Nor are you to be called instructors, for you have one Instructor, the Messiah.
ket bongo woko kaddi ceng pe, olo woo 	put the clothes outside even though there is no sun, they get partially dry
kom aweno ocwinynyo ma kwici kwici 	guinea fowl has fine spotted black and white feathers 
latek ken wi ogwang ma otwo	the disobedient does not eat smoked head of the wild cat
nen ka tic me pii i ature tye maber	see whether the pouring of water in the flowers is good
jal bin kany 	you fellow come here 
um ki wang	nose and eyes
pien coc ma yam gicoyo loko ni, Wubedo jo maleŋ, pien an aleŋ.	As obedient children, do not conform to the evil desires you had when you lived in ignorance.
bonyo atiko tyengi tye dye ongwecgi ma tek ma gwaarro cing dano mada ka gitye ka makkongi 	the red locusts have strong legs with spikes that scratch the hands when they are being caught 
ento ka gudonyo iye, pe gunoŋo kom Rwot Yecu. 	They found the stone rolled away from the tomb,
cai kello lyetto woko oyot oyot ka imatto 	tea brings an immediate warmth when you take it
jami man ducu twerro catte maber mada 	he sells very good shoes 
Lwak gucako wo ni, “Gure woko i kom yatariya.” 	“Crucify him!” they shouted.
otullo wangge i komme 	he gazed at him with wkie open eyes (usually in anger)
Ento Paulo odaŋŋe ki dwane matek ni, “Pe itimme kekeni marac, wan ducu watye kany.” 	But Paul shouted, “Don’t harm yourself! We are all here!”
litino gucitto ka cubbo lawala 	the children have gone to play the game in which a lawala which is thrown and runs at a speed is knocked down by a long stick that is thrown through its centre by one of the players
Jo ma gucamo cam meno onoŋo giromo co alip abic, ma noŋo pe gikwano iye mon ki litino. 	They all ate and were satisfied, and the disciples picked up twelve basketfuls of broken pieces that were left over.
dano adii ma tye ka yanggo dyel ma ginekkoni  	how many people are skinning the slaughtered goat?
ngat ma yee bemme ci gitwerro bemme bene 	anybody who believes in charming can be charmed 
agwata me lamat pii 	gourd bowl for drinking water
leb atero oluu 	the tip of the arrow is blunt 
Yecu odok iye ni, “Pe myero gucit woko	Send the crowds away, so they can go to the villages and buy themselves some food.”
Gucito i kabedo ma nyiŋe Gececemane, ci ociko lupwonnyene ni, “Wun koŋ wubed kany, an koŋ acileg Lubaŋa.” 	They went to a place called Gethsemane, and Jesus said to his disciples, “Sit here while I pray.”
ka en mitto citto weki ocitti 	if he wants to go let him go
cwallo Oto ka willo kado 	to send Oto to buy some salt
ckia otuur woko i kare ma gitye ka tukko i wiye 	the wooden bed broke when they were playing on it 
lyerro otigo  	to slice okra
tucco gin ma dano moo otiyo pe ber	to betray somebody of what he has done is not good
Utmegina, wamito ni wuniaŋ i kom can ma waneno i Acia	And our hope for you is firm, because we know that just as you share in our sufferings, so also you share in our comfort.
gucitto ka willo cam 	they went to buy some food 
mon guterro kalgi i wii pata ka twoo iye 	the women took their millet to the flat rock to dry it there 
jo ma tyen gi ogerre gigweyo odillo maber mada 	bow legged people play football very well
yoo twerro janynye ki kany ma dano twerro wok iye 	the path can be made here where people can pass through by pushing aside the grass
pakko jamine  	to adore his properties
Pien lok ma yam gicoyo waco ni, “Pe itwe dog twon ka tye ka nyono bel,” dok bene ni, “Latic myero giculle mucarane.” 	The elders who direct the affairs of the church well are worthy of double honor, especially those whose work is preaching and teaching.
bul myel man ginynyo kom mada 	the sound of this dance drum stimulates very much the body
Dok i lok meno oloyogi woko. 	And they had nothing to say.
oceke iye twolo 	the pipe for beer is hollow
wil wic gin marac mada 	forgetfulness is a very bad thing 
Ci ogonyo botgi Baraba	All the people answered, “His blood is on us and on our children!”
abul anyogine?	may I grill the maize? 
tim me Jerre mada, in dano madit me citto ka butto i kin litino 	it is a humiliating thing for you, an adult to go to sleep among the children
kot ma laworo ocwer matek twatwal omiyo dong geg kulo omwarre ci oo woko i kulu 	the torrential rain of yesterday made a large part of the bank of the river to break up and pour into the river 
en pe ngeyo boc me jami maber 	he does not know low to wrap things 
Gukok ki dwan maloŋo ni, “Ai Rwot Madit, Rwot maleŋ ki me ada, abitero kare ma rom mene ma noŋo peya iŋolo kop, dok ma noŋo peya iculo kwor me remowa i kom jo ma bedo i lobo?” 	They called out in a loud voice, “How long, Sovereign Lord, holy and true, until you judge the inhabitants of the earth and avenge our blood?”
obeer nywallo tongge ma en aye lacen tokko oluk kwidi matitino ma beddo ka kwang i wii pii lacen oluk lokke dokko matek matye ki pokke lacen pokkeni tyer ci obeer dong katti woko 	the mosquito produces first eggs which hatch into larvae which in tum latter develops into pupa which later burst open and the mosquito comes out and become the mosquito
Ka odwoŋo dog gaŋ ma i yo, ci aŋeca ma nyiŋe Roda obino ka niaŋ i kome. 	Peter knocked at the outer entrance, and a servant named Rhoda came to answer the door.
kun pe waweko cokke kacel, kit macalo jo mogo doŋ guloko odoko kitgi-ni, ento myero wacuku cwinywa kekenwa, makatone kit macalo wuneno Nino maca doŋ tye ka nyiko cok-ki. 	not giving up meeting together, as some are in the habit of doing, but encouraging one another—and all the more as you see the Day approaching.
anyogi man guaa mabecco mada i poto man	the maize is growing up very well in this field
atammo ni abicitto 	I think that I will go 
Ento okeyo Paulo owinyo kit ma gikiye kwede, ci ocito odonyo i gogo otito ki Paulo. 	But when the son of Paul’s sister heard of this plot, he went into the barracks and told Paul.
Yecu pe oketo cwinye i kom lok ma guwaco, ento ociko ladit me kacokke ni, “Pe ilwor, in iye meri ayeya keken.” 	Overhearing what they said, Jesus told him, “Don’t be afraid; just believe.”
Ka doŋ gutyeko wok ki i Ampipoli ki Apolonia, ci gubino i Tecalonika, ka ma kacokke pa Lujudaya tye iye. 	When Paul and his companions had passed through Amphipolis and Apollonia, they came to Thessalonica, where there was a Jewish synagogue.
Yecu onoŋo latin kana, obedo i wiye, kit macalo gicoyo ni, 	They took palm branches and went out to meet him, shouting, “Hosanna!” “Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord!” “Blessed is the king of Israel!”
Acoli wacci ka iribbo cam ki neru ci puc makki 	Acholi says that if you share food with your uncle, you get warts 
Jo ducu ma i gang gucokke i doggola. 	The whole town gathered at the door,
rotto lee	to track the animal 
kel cak me amatta ki latin 	bring some milk for the child to drink
aburro aburra ki lok omiyo otitta kama wonne tye lye	I frightened him with words and that made him tell me where his father was hiding
dano ma lanyab kom matto pii ki opado 	a lazy person drinks water with broken pieces of calabash
pe mitto cwaargi owil bongo mo maber ki nyekke 	she does not like their husband to buy any beautiful dress for her co-wife
Ka dok agero gedo ma yam amuko areto woko piny-nyi odoco, ci an kara labal marac. 	“But if, in seeking to be justified in Christ, we Jews find ourselves also among the sinners, doesn’t that mean that Christ promotes sin? Absolutely not!
joone pe gimaarre wacel  	the fellows do not love each other at all
aya omeera in itimme nigning? 	oh brother what are you doing? 
ogwal bollo tong gi i wil pii mape mol 	frogs lay their eggs on stagnant water 
Ka en doŋ ocer odiko con i nino mukwoŋo me cabit, okwoŋo nyutte bot Maliam Lamagdala, ma yam en oryemo cen abiro i kome-ni. 	When Jesus rose early on the first day of the week, he appeared first to Mary Magdalene, out of whom he had driven seven demons.
piŋo pe wuŋeyo poko kin lanyut me kare man? 	How is it that you don’t know how to interpret this present time?
latin myenno pingoo? 	why is the child about to cry? 
bongone odyak ni joto-joto 	his clothes are completely wet 
Dok bene atye ki gen i Rwot ni an kikoma abio botwu i kare macokcok-ki. 	I hope, therefore, to send him as soon as I see how things go with me.
litino ducu ma gibibinno lacen i cukul gibimiinigi makatala 	all the children that will come late to school will be punished 
Dok bene pe irune me keto ciŋi i kom ŋat mo, nyo me ribbe ki jo mukene i balgi	I charge you, in the sight of God and Christ Jesus and the elect angels, to keep these instructions without partiality, and to do nothing out of favoritism.
tye ka wirro yat moni wek komme obokke woko 	she is dyeing her body with a certain medicine so that his body may become brown 
latin tye caa 	the child is over there
wabinene kwedwu inino ma anyim ka Luabag oye 	we shall see one another in future, when God wills
en dano ma latam atata mada, i kare mukene tammo ni gimitto nekke 	he is a person who has confused thinking, sometimes he suspects that he is wanted to be killed
omiyo pi kit ma yam watye kwede, kiniga pa Lubaŋa myero opot i komwa calo poto i kom jo mukene ducu. 	All of us also lived among them at one time, gratifying the cravings of our flesh and following its desires and thoughts
Gaŋ madit nyo paco mo ma wudonyo iye, koŋ wuniaŋ aŋa ma myero ma bedo iye, ci wubed bote nio waŋ ma wua ki kenyo. 	Whatever town or village you enter, search there for some worthy person and stay at their house until you leave.
Ci Catan owacce ni, “Magi ducu abimiyo boti, ka iryebbe iwora.” 	“All this I will give you,” he said, “if you will bow down and worship me.”
Odaŋŋe ni, ‘Wora Abraim, tima kica, cwal Lajaro olut lwet ciŋe i pii, okwe ki leba, pien atye ki arem madwoŋ i mac man.’ 	In Hades, where he was in torment, he looked up and saw Abraham far away, with Lazarus by his side.
I kare ma gitye ka celo Citefano ki got, en olego ni, “Rwot Yecu, gam cwinya,” 	While they were stoning him, Stephen prayed, “Lord Jesus, receive my spirit.”
Ginacoya pe tito ni, Kricito ma Lubaŋa oyero a ki i anywalli pa Daudi, ki i Beterekem, i gaŋ ma yam Daudi bedo iye?” 	Others said, “He is the Messiah.” Still others asked, “How can the Messiah come from Galilee?
kel oraa wek acwiny ki mac itee agulo i wii keno 	bring me the long grass so that I may light the fire under the pot on the fireplace
oteerro latin ka rutto itte me ketto ogwilo 	she took the child to have her ears pierced for putting in the earrings
Gin gubedo ka winyo lok i komi ni ipwonyo Lujudaya ducu ma gitye i kin Lurok ni gubwot cik pa Moses woko, dok bene ni itito lok botgi kiloŋ ni pe gulir litinogi, pe gulub kitwa. 	They have been informed that you teach all the Jews who live among the Gentiles to turn away from Moses, telling them not to circumcise their children or live according to our customs.
otiyo pii pong li bic i agulo 	she filled the pot with water up to its brim
Ka ŋat mo okelo cwercwiny, pe onoŋo ocwero cwinya, ento noŋo otemo cwero cwinywu ducu, nyo wek awacci, jo mapol i kinwu, pien pe myero awac lok mapek mukato kare. 	For I wrote you out of great distress and anguish of heart and with many tears, not to grieve you but to let you know the depth of my love for you.
balle me lobo ki cwercwiny keken aye tye i yo gudogi ducu, 	“Their feet are swift to shed blood;
Meno aye lanen ma nyuto kit ma Lubaŋa ŋolo kwede kop atir dok kakare, wek gibikwanwu ni wun jo ma myero i ker pa Lubaŋa ma wutye ka neno can pireni. 	All this is evidence that God’s judgment is right, and as a result you will be counted worthy of the kingdom of God, for which you are suffering.
Kombeddi do? ginyuto woko botwa i bino pa Lalarwa Kricito Yecu ma do? okwanyo to woko matwal, ci omiyo kwo ma bedo matwal onen woko ka male? pi lok me kwena maber. 	For the Spirit God gave us does not make us timid, but gives us power, love and self-discipline.
laa man komme twerro bocce 	this leather can be scraped
lokko lok tino 	talks childishly or nonsense 
dako ma apano nywallo litino oyot oyot ma nywal pe makko 	a woman who has wide chest and pelvis delivers easily without obstruction
pe ibed ki tam marac i kom omeeru 	do not have bad thoughts about your brother
canduk ma giketto alegga i wii bao caa tye ka yurre koni potto piny 	the box put not straight on the board there,is gliding down it will soon fall down 
Ajwagi madito pa Lubaŋa ki lupwony-cik ki jo madito i kin lwak guyenyo yo me neke	But the chief priests, the teachers of the law and the leaders among the people were trying to kill him.
ngat ma ngeyo tukko goga oa malo wek ginen 	nybody who knows how to make jokes should stand up 
ngat ma belle karatac atata i dye cukul gibimiine makatala 	any person who drops papers pieces ot about in the school compound will be punished
tol aryo man twerro tudde 	these two ropes can be tied
dano bene beddo i dong gituti 	people also sit on the edge of the raised part of the room
Ka oo otyeno, lupwonnyene gubino bote, guwacce ni, “Man kabedo ka ma dano pe iye, cawa bene doŋ okato woko	Then they went and told Jesus.
pii ne twerro tkide ka wubeddo ka kurrone 	the water can be drawn if you sit waiting there
I cut lir laa man wek i nong iye del tol matek 	cut this leather into strips in order to get strong rope
gimakkongi ka gerre 	they were caught having sexual intercourse 
wiye tal medde amedda 	his baldness is increasing
otit meny ki dyer wor 	the firefly glows at night
yutto buk woko ki i cingge	to snatch away a book from him
cany lobo me again	beat clay for pottery
gupenynye mada  	they questioned or interrogated him very much
“Pe wutam ni abino me kelo kuc i lobo	“Do not suppose that I have come to bring peace to the earth
Yecu okato woko ki i ot pa Lubaŋa. Ma doŋ tye ka cito, lupwonnyene gubino gunyutte gedo me ot pa Lubaŋa. 	Jesus left the temple and was walking away when his disciples came up to him to call his attention to its buildings.
cak tye ka yenynyo bwoyo 	the milk is foaming
pien dano me lobo man giryek i yalwakgi, makato dano me ceŋ. 	“The master commended the dishonest manager because he had acted shrewdly
I kare ma kec opoto i lobo Ejipt ducu ki i Kanaan, okelo can madwoŋ ma omiyo kit me noŋo cam oloyo kwarowa woko. 	“Then a famine struck all Egypt and Canaan, bringing great suffering, and our ancestors could not find food.
litino tin gucammo onyubbo lapena mada 	the children today ate a lot of sauce of mixed pigeon peas and simsim
“Wubineno can, ka dano ducu pwoyowu, pien kwarigi yam gupwoyo lunebi ma lugoba kit meno. 	Woe to you when everyone speaks well of you, for that is how their ancestors treated the false prophets.
Pi Rwotwa, myero wumine me bedo i te loc me twero ducu ma tye i kin dano, bot laloc madit, pien en aye ma loyo jo ducu, 	Live such good lives among the pagans that, though they accuse you of doing wrong, they may see your good deeds and glorify God on the day he visits us.
ruc en aye cam madit mada pa jo Caina ki Indi 	rice is the main food for Chinese and Indians 
gucitto i lukiko  	they went to attend the court
lacoone kit purre pe nianggo dano pien yurru ayurra 	it is difficult to understand how the man cultivates because he does it roughly 
winyo otuk woko ni piir 	the bird flew off
waddo wang pii tye diki 	removing of the mud from the water well is tomorrow 
laco ma woro Lubaŋa, en ki jo ma i ode ducu. En yam miyo jami mapol me konyo dano bot Lujudaya, kun lego Lubaŋa jwijwi. 	He and all his family were devout and God-fearing; he gave generously to those in need and prayed to God regularly.
mon rwotgi peke	women have no chiefs, or chiefs are not chiefs to women
Myero anyatte	But whenever anyone turns to the Lord, the veil is taken away.
Jo mukene ca gitito nyiŋ Kricito pi laro dito kun noŋo cwinygi pe leŋ, tamgi tye me medo can bota i buc kany. 	The latter do so out of love, knowing that I am put here for the defense of the gospel.
mac luduku tin omakkongi mada 	they were fired at very heavily
wotto ma ganynye aganynya callo gin mo tye i kin emme	walks waddling as though there is something between his thighs
dakone odee mada ki lagara ma oketto i itee itte ryoryo ducu 	the woman has ardoned herself beautifully with rows of earrings on both ear lobes
i kare macon jami ducu ononggo gitiyo ki mola makwar 	in the past all musical instruments were made of copper 
labwor en aye guu ma lagerro twatwal nikatto mukene ducu 	the lion is the most feriocious list than any other predators 
pien wun ducu doŋ wudoko litino pa Lubaŋa pi niye Yecu Kricito. 	So the law was our guardian until Christ came that we might be justified by faith.
ocitto ka reggo 	has gone to grind 
obwotto dakone woko 	he left or deserted his wife 
Ci abituco botgi ka maleŋ ni, ‘Onoŋo pe aŋeyowu	Many will say to me on that day, ‘Lord, Lord, did we not prophesy in your name and in your name drive out demons and in your name perform many miracles?’
Ento wugwokke, wek twero ma wutye kwede pe odok gin mo ma miyo dano magoro poto i bal. 	Be careful, however, that the exercise of your rights does not become a stumbling block to the weak.
Pien in pe ibitenya ata i lobo pa jo muto, pe ibiweko kom danoni ma geni top woko. 	because you will not abandon me to the realm of the dead, you will not let your holy one see decay.
mitto yutte kama cok kany 	wants to go to a near by place  
Akello tye ka geddo nyuka madit mada ki litino 	Akello is making much gruel for the children
latin dong kec tye ka nekkone mada, iye onat, omiyo dong pali tye ayol i pyerre, ka wotto pall dong lyerre alyerra i pyerre 	the child is very hungry, the abdomen is flat, and that made the trousers very loose and swing about when he walks
pi tiyo ducu ma yam iyubo pi tweroni ki mitti ni myero otimme. 	They did what your power and will had decided beforehand should happen.
latinne dongoteg woko 	the child is now obstinate and disobedient 
Lok me kwena man maber-ri gicoyo okemo Wode. I kit me kom, Wode-nu yam ginywale i kin likwayo pa Daudi, 	the gospel he promised beforehand through his prophets in the Holy Scriptures
yul lum ki i wii ot  	pull the grass off from the root of a hut
jer tegge wek dano gukati 	move away in order to let the people pass 
En tiyo ticce i kabedo maleŋ, i kema me ada ma Rwot aye oguro, ento pe dano. 	and who serves in the sanctuary, the true tabernacle set up by the Lord, not by a mere human being.
gucitto ka giine me twoo anino 	they went to be examined for sleeping sickness disease
Ento ka pe owinyo lokki, kwany dano acel nyo aryo mukene wucit kwedgi, wek lok ma caden aryo nyo adek giloko omok lok ducu. 	But if they will not listen, take one or two others along, so that ‘every matter may be established by the testimony of two or three witnesses.’
wod pa Metucela, wod pa Enok, wod pa Jared, wod pa Maalalel, wod pa Kainan, 	the son of Methuselah, the son of Enoch, the son of Jared, the son of Mahalalel, the son of Kenan,
oyo kirubu kiporo	rats are stacked acccording to thier sizes
komme obeddo aciri	the body is spotted thinly black and white
gin mo pe woko li weng i ot tin me atedda 	there is completely nothing for cooking in the house
Dok orwone otuc botgi ma onoŋo daa tye i kingi	The next day Moses came upon two Israelites who were fighting
won tic tye kwene? 	where is the employer? 
Ci jo ma gutelo yo ki jo ma gilubo kore gidaŋŋe ni, “Ojana! Lubaŋa omi gum i kom dano ma bino i nyiŋ Rwot! 	Those who went ahead and those who followed shouted, “Hosanna!” “Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord!”
ngad gut gweno man woko 	cut the neck of this chicken
latin tye ka ngok 	the child is vomiting 
lir cuun awobi man 	circumcise this boy's penis
nen wiye ma onyanynye kwedde, pe ikel miggi kany 	look, with your flattened head, do not bring your stupidity here
jol pii matye ka oo nia ki i tagi i debe man nio ka opong ci kwany woko dok iket mukene nio ka en bene opong 	collect the water in this tin, which is pouring from the tank until it is full and remove it, and put another until it also become full
Kato (Paska), ma en nino madit pa Lujudaya, onoŋo doŋ cok. 	Then Jesus went up on a mountainside and sat down with his disciples.
Ka Lujudaya ma onoŋo gitye bote i ot kun gikweyo cwinye guneno Maliam oa malo oyotoyot, okato woko, gulubo kore, kun gitamo ni en cito i wi lyel ka koko kunnu. 	Now Jesus had not yet entered the village, but was still at the place where Martha had met him.
“Lobo bineno can pi gin ma miyo dano gipoto i bal. Pien gin ma miyo dano poto i bal myero obin, ento dano ma kelo gin ma miyo dano poto i bal bineno can! 	Woe to the world because of the things that cause people to stumble! Such things must come, but woe to the person through whom they come!
dano twerro wolle kene, ka cammo earn ki cingge mape lwokko, pien cing makko jami ma pat pat 	a man can poison himself, if he eats without washing his fingers, because they touch many things
Ka dok odwogo onoŋo gunino woko, pien onoŋo nino doŋ omako waŋgi twatwal	When he came back, he again found them sleeping, because their eyes were heavy
ci nen, jami ducu bibedo maleŋ botwu. 	You should have practiced the latter without leaving the former undone.
I kare ma Yecu tye i ot pa Cimon ladobo, i kare ma obedo ka cam, dako mo obino ma kun tye ki adomo moo nard kikome ma welle dwoŋ-ŋi	While he was in Bethany, reclining at the table in the home of Simon the Leper, a woman came with an alabaster jar of very expensive perfume, made of pure nard
Ŋat ma pe maro Rwot myero gicen woko. Bin Rwotwa! 	If anyone does not love the Lord, let that person be cursed! Come, Lord!
ento i cokke pa jo muye Kricito amito loko lok abic mo keken ki tamma wek apwony ki jo mukene, makato loko lok alip ki alip kun adumo aduma ki leb mapatpat. 	But in the church I would rather speak five intelligible words to instruct others than ten thousand words in a tongue.
poorro kit yoo ma ngati mo timmo kwede 	imitating the way how one does it
adong olorre madit mada i kom itte ma tung lacam	a very large keloid has developed on the lobe of her left ear
Ento dok aneno cik mukene i dul koma ducu, kun tye ka lweny ki cik ma i tamma, tera i opii i te cik me bal ma bedo i dul koma ducu. 	For in my inner being I delight in God’s law;
Ka ceŋ en oekato ki i yo, oneno dano ma ginywale ma waŋe oto. 	I have made you known to them, and will continue to make you known in order that the love you have for me may be in them and that I myself may be in them.”
akuri ma welo piyo moko	a visiting dove is easily caught in the snare
gwel lem Latin wek Men ka nyerro 	stroke the child's cheek and see if she laughs
ringo ma otwoo 	smoked meat 
Pe wuwot ki jabu, kadi ryal, kadi lim mo i del pyerwu, 	“Do not get any gold or silver or copper to take with you in your belts—
latinne pud peya ngeyo gweyo dek maber 	his child does not know how to scoop the food very well
yaarro kweyo, kal, ki nyim 	to spread out sand, millet and simsim
Lubaŋa yam koŋ owaco ki lamalaika mo ni, “In i Woda, tin doŋ anywali”? Nyo dok ni, “An abibedo Wonne, en bibedo Woda”? 	For to which of the angels did God ever say, “You are my Son; today I have become your Father”? Or again, “I will be his Father, and he will be my Son”?
latinni doki potto cim twatwal 	the child gets frequent attacks of epilepsy
latin ma lalee dong kika pa dano 	a child who goes from house to house aimlessly
joo madito gubed wii abam ento joo matino gubed piny	the elders should sit on the platform but the young ones should sit down
Kit macalo gicoyo ni, “Yam amaro Yakobo, ento akwero Ecau.” 	not by works but by him who calls—she was told, “The older will serve the younger.”
Yecu ociko Petero ni, “Dwok palani i akurane. Kikopo ma Abana omiya pe abimato?” 	(The servant’s name was Malchus.)
Miwa tin camwa me tin. 	“This, then, is how you should pray: “‘Our Father in heaven, hallowed be your name,
ento luloc guŋale kun giwaco ni, “Yam olaro jo mukene, koŋ olarre kene ka en Kricito pa Lubaŋa, ma en oyero!” 	They said, “He saved others; let him save himself if he is God’s Messiah, the Chosen One.”
tet mitto ot madit ma jami ducu tye iye me tet 	forging requires a big building in which everything for forging are there
ojony ma wangge dong golle agolla 	he is so wasted that his eyes are getting hollow and hollow
I ceŋ cabit mo acel, ka Yecu ocito ka cam i ot pa laloc mo ma Laparicayo, gubedo ka kiye matek. 	One Sabbath, when Jesus went to eat in the house of a prominent Pharisee, he was being carefully watched.
iparro nngoo ma omiyo igwakke kitmeno? 	what is worrying you that is making you fold your arms?
tung lee wek gubin ci wacubgi 	stir the animals so that they may come to us to spear them
“Ŋat ma nyatte myero onyatte pi Rwot,” macalo yam gicoyo. 	Our hope is that, as your faith continues to grow, our sphere of activity among you will greatly expand,
latinne Tale lee mada man pud obinno tin odiko man dong okwanynyo jami mapol ata ma en oballo 	the child is really uncontrollable, he came this morning and now he has already taken many things that he has spoiled
kun wuyubbe me tito lok me kwena maber me kuc ma bedo macalo war ma wuruko i tyenwu. 	Stand firm then, with the belt of truth buckled around your waist, with the breastplate of righteousness in place,
I kare ma dok oyabo ka ma gimwono me aŋwenne, ci awinyo lee makwo me aŋwenne ka loko ni, “Bin!” 	When the Lamb opened the fourth seal, I heard the voice of the fourth living creature say, “Come!”
ajaa giyeggo kwede jok	ajaa is shaken for summoning jok 
Lonyo madit kit man-ni giketo woko teŋteŋ lawaŋacel.” Ludito me mel, ki jo ma woto i nam, ludwo mel ki jo ducu ma gitiyo tic me cato wil i nam, gucuŋ wa cen ka mabor, 	In one hour such great wealth has been brought to ruin!’ “Every sea captain, and all who travel by ship, the sailors, and all who earn their living from the sea, will stand far off.
 gujwerro dano woko liweng ma i gang 	they killed all the people in the home
poc i lok macon ma kit meno pe dong twerre	to remember old matters like that is now impossible
nino ducu lokko lok me jayo get jami ma gicwalle ka ommone 	he always talks of taking small parts of anything that he was sent to bring 
Pien ka dano mo ma tam ma i iye ma nyutte balle pud goro oneno ni ma itye ki ŋec ibedo ka cam i ot jok, pe bimedo tekcwiny bote me camo riŋo ma gityero bot jogi? 	For if someone with a weak conscience sees you, with all your knowledge, eating in an idol’s temple, won’t that person be emboldened to eat what is sacrificed to idols?
curru kal 	to pound millet
gwok tye ka cammo cam ma i wu odur 	the dog is eating food from the rubbish heap 
en aye yat ma giluggo matitino ma gimunynyo amunynya me canggo twoo 	it is a medicine which is made into small round shapes that are swallowed for the treatment of diseases
anonggo nyako moni ka pwonno muyembe mewa 	I found a certain girl picking our mangoes
latin akwarra kayo dano ni jik jik 	a neonate's biting which he bites with toothless gum
ibicito bot Cecar.” 	To Caesar you will go!”
nyomme mere gin me deyo 	marriage or wedding is an honourable thing
lajok nino mukene wirre ki buro i dye wor 	last night, a night dancer was arrested when he was dancing at Olobo's home 
ngaa mukene bene matye ka pwony? 	who else is also teaching? 
pok ler ogali en aye giriyo ki tee nyo dong atero 	the fibrous bark of the roots of ogali is used for tying the end and upper part of the arrows
tandarua giummo ki wii kabutto wek ogeg obeer pe okaa dano 	mosquito net is used for covering the bed to prevent mosquitoes from biting the people
I kare meno jo ducu ma gilwoŋo nyiŋ Rwot gibilarogi.’ 	And everyone who calls on the name of the Lord will be saved.’
gitye ka purro poto caa  	they are cultivating the field there
otong tong en aye lwango ma kobo twoo anino i kom dano, kayo ngat ma tye ki kwidi me twoo meno, ci terro kayo ki ngat mukene ci gullo kwkii meno i komme 	tsetse fly is the fly that transmits the disease from one person to another, it bites a person with the parasites and carries them and goes and bites another person and discharges the parasites to her
puk buro madwong i coron wek onek iwangi matye madowong iiye kuno 	pour a lot of ashes into the latrine so that it may kill the flies which are too many inside there 
Ŋat acel i kingi otoŋo opii pa ajwaka madit pa Lubaŋa, oŋuno ite malacuc woko. 	And one of them struck the servant of the high priest, cutting off his right ear.
Yam en tye ki anyirane aŋwen ma pe ginyomogi, ma yam gitito lok pa Lubaŋa. 	He had four unmarried daughters who prophesied.
kun iloko lok ada ma pe gitwero noŋo roc mo iye, wek omi lewic omak ŋat mo ma mito pyem kwedwa, pien pe neno gin mo marac ma myero ewac i komwa. 	Similarly, encourage the young men to be self-controlled.
Um mere twerro jogge ki bot dano 	the money can be collected from the people
otweyo tol ojwanggo woko ajwangga 	he did not fasten the rope properly
pien onoŋo otamo ki i cwinye kekene ni, “Ka ce agudo boŋone keken, ci abicaŋ.” 	Just then a woman who had been subject to bleeding for twelve years came up behind him and touched the edge of his cloak.
tem wot mot mot, gicel gicel, ci tyenni ma okweeni tekke bidwoggo cen 	try to walk slowly once in a while and the loss in power of your legs will come back
gupokko iye aryo ci ngat acel acel oteerro nucune 	they divided it into two and each one of them took a half
pang wii motoka odok tung lacuc wek pe kiony i opony 	turn the car to the right in order to avoid falling into the ditch
Kit meno wun bene, ka wuneno gin magi otimme, myero wuŋe ni ker pa Lubaŋa doŋ onyiko cok. 	Even so, when you see these things happening, you know that the kingdom of God is near.
Gin me loro dogcel apar wiye aryo-ni onoŋo obedo tiko matar me wel apar wiye aryo, gin me loro dogcel acel acel gitiyo ki kit tiko-nu acel keken	The twelve gates were twelve pearls, each gate made of a single pearl
ento ka pe gunoŋo yo, pi pol pa lwak, guito i wi ot, gucwale ki kitarane ki i kin mategula i dye ot i nyim Yecu. 	But Jesus often withdrew to lonely places and prayed.
lyerro bongo wii tol	hanging the clothes on the line to dry
en okwogo citto anyim 	he went in advance or before
Gin ducu guriŋo woko, guweke odoŋ kene. 	Then everyone deserted him and fled.
nyako ma wangge taar  	a loose, lustful girl
giteng yat i komme wek onek okodo woko 	dust the body with the medicine to kill the ticks
jal man dong lokke alokka callo lagogo ki bongo ma rukko 	the fellow changes clothes like a chameleon with clothes that he wears
yeng cak matye i opoko wek odok moo 	shake the milk in the gourd to become butter
“Bot lamalaika pa lwak muye an ma gitye i Tuatira co kit man ni, “Man lok pa Wod pa Lubaŋa ma waŋe calo leb mac ma lyel, ki tyene ducu calo mola ma girudo maleŋ adada. 	“To the angel of the church in Thyatira write: These are the words of the Son of God, whose eyes are like blazing fire and whose feet are like burnished bronze.
Yecu owacce ni, “Koŋ iwek litino gukwoŋ yeŋ, pe ber gikwany cam pa litino, gibol ki gwogi.” 	“First let the children eat all they want,” he told her, “for it is not right to take the children’s bread and toss it to the dogs.”
cak ma libo en aye ber mada ki litino ma tino me mattone 	fresh milk is the one that is very good for the young children to drink
kweyo obakke ni pim kuno ma kadi lorry abic bene jubbo kwee pe tum 	there is a large quantity of sand there, even five lorries cannot carry and finish the sand
teneci en aye tuko ma dano maarro mada pien miyo kom beddo ma yot 	tennis is a game which is liked very much by many people because it gives fitness to the people
Jo ma gimol gikato ki ka ŋete gubedo ka yete, kun giyeŋo wigi, 	Two rebels were crucified with him, one on his right and one on his left.
wot i Iwor ot 	go round the house
gudwogo cen kun giwaco ni guneno lumalaika ma onyutte botgi, kun giwaco ni en kwo gire. 	but didn’t find his body
Ci gucito guloro dog lyel woko maber kun gimwono lanen iye i kom got, ka guketo lukur-piny me gwokone.	“Go, make the tomb as secure as you know how.”
Yecu ka oneno niyegi, ci owaco bot latwo ni, “Latinna, balli doŋ giweko woko.” 	When Jesus saw their faith, he said to the paralyzed man, “Son, your sins are forgiven.”
Pien dano ma mito laro kwone birwenyone arwenya, ento ka dano mo orwenyo kwone pira ki pi lok me kwena maber, en aye bilaro kwone. 	For whoever wants to save their life will lose it, but whoever loses their life for me and for the gospel will save it.
Dano ma tamme pe oballe i koma tye ki gum.” 	Blessed is anyone who does not stumble on account of me.”
Olworo waŋe i kom jo ma gurume ma gubedo piny, owaco ni, “Maa ki omega gin ene. 	Then he looked at those seated in a circle around him and said, “Here are my mother and my brothers!
ariggo aol mada 	I ran and got very red
ruk pa litino me school gibecco mada 	the dresses of the school children are very good 
En geno Lubaŋa, wek Lubaŋa koŋ olare kombeddi, ka mite	In the same way the chief priests, the teachers of the law and the elders mocked him.
ngeene ber 	knowing each other is very good 
kweri kweri man purre tye kwene 	where is the handle for this hoe?
Utmegiwa, wun bene wumako kit pa lwak jo muye Lubaŋa ma tye i Kricito Yecu, i kabedo ducu ma tye i Judaya, pien wun bene wuneno can ki bot lutuwu kikome ma rom ki can ma gin guneno bot Lujudaya, 	For you, brothers and sisters, became imitators of God’s churches in Judea, which are in Christ Jesus: You suffered from your own people the same things those churches suffered from the Jews
Korgi obedo calo nyonyo ma askari gigeŋo ki korgi, ma noŋo bwomgi ŋur winnye calo mor pa lwak gadigadi lweny ma lwak aguragura aye giywayo, kun gicito gilaro lweny. 	They had breastplates like breastplates of iron, and the sound of their wings was like the thundering of many horses and chariots rushing into battle.
Yecu oneno Natanael kun bino bote, oloko i kome ni, “Nen Laicrael me ada, ma pe tye ki goba mo i cwinye!” 	Philip found Nathanael and told him, “We have found the one Moses wrote about in the Law, and about whom the prophets also wrote—Jesus of Nazareth, the son of Joseph.”
run litino gubin oyot oyot	hurry the children to come very quickly
ento pe obed kit macalo an amito, gin ma in imito aye myero otimme.” 	Yet not as I will, but as you will.”
ringone ocek pun coo 	the meat cooked is not quite soft but firm like man's calf
Jo mogo gukelo bote dano ma twoyo two akweya kom, jo aŋwen aye gutiŋo en. 	Some men came, bringing to him a paralyzed man, carried by four of them.
Kit meno, Jon Labatija ocako nen i tim, kun tito lok ni, Wuŋut wek wulim batija, wek Lubaŋa owek balwu. 	And so John the Baptist appeared in the wilderness, preaching a baptism of repentance for the forgiveness of sins.
okal omakko laka woko omiyo rem twatwal 	I have cavities in my teeth that is why they are very painful
gwok tye ka cucce woko caa mitto tinggo ringo ma gitye ka tallone ni 	the dog is hanging around outside there and wants to take away the meat which is being smoked
miyo litino me woo i kilaci pe ber	allowing the children to shout in the class is not good 
tye ki yoo mapol me punno dano 	he has many tricks of conning people
matto kopo twatwal jwikko gee pa dano 	drinking too much alcohol reduces a person's knowledge 
Mukwoŋo apwoyo Lubaŋana i Yecu Kricito pi wun ducu, pien niyewu doŋ gituco pire oromo wi lobo woko ducu. 	To all in Rome who are loved by God and called to be his holy people: Grace and peace to you from God our Father and from the Lord Jesus Christ.
Gudokke iye ni, “In bene ia ki i Galilaya? Koŋ iyeny, ibineno ni pe tye lanebi mo ma bia ki i Galilaya.” [ 	“Does our law condemn a man without first hearing him to find out what he has been doing?”
pe ipur kama obeddo got got miyo lak kweri nyanynye woko 	do not cultivate in a stony area because it will make the edge ot the hoe blunt
En otiyo tic mogo madito ma bedo me aura twatwal, dok bene miyo mac a ki i polo bino piny i lobo ma dano bene gineno. 	And it performed great signs, even causing fire to come down from heaven to the earth in full view of the people.
wan doŋ cilo me jami ducu. 	We have become the scum of the earth, the garbage of the world—right up to this moment.
pok dyel ki dyangi pat pat 	separate the goats from the cows
ma giwaco ni, “Wun Lugalilaya, piŋo wucuŋ wuneno malo i polo? Yecu man ma doŋ gitiŋo malo ki botwu gitere i polo, bidwogo doki kit macalo wuneno gitere kwede i polo-ni.” 	“Men of Galilee,” they said, “why do you stand here looking into the sky? This same Jesus, who has been taken from you into heaven, will come back in the same way you have seen him go into heaven.”
“ ‘Ento bot wun jo mukene ma wutye i Tuatira, ma pe wulubo kit pwony man, dok bene pe wupwonyo gin mo ma gilwoŋo ni “muŋ matut pa Catan”, doŋ atito botwu ni, pe doki abimiedo yec mo mukene botwu. 	Now I say to the rest of you in Thyatira, to you who do not hold to her teaching and have not learned Satan’s so-called deep secrets, ‘I will not impose any other burden on you,
too mupira manok 	deflate the football a little too 
Ciguonyo putu i wigi, i kare ma gitye ka koko kun gikumo ma gidaŋŋe ki koko matek pire ni, “Ai do, ai do, ineno can ba, in gaŋ madit-ti, ka ma jo ducu ma yam gitye ki melgi i nam gudoko lulonyo pi lonyone madwoŋŋi! Giketo woko teŋteŋ i cawa acel keken. 	They will throw dust on their heads, and with weeping and mourning cry out: “‘Woe! Woe to you, great city, where all who had ships on the sea became rich through her wealth! In one hour she has been brought to ruin!’
macalo yam gicoyo ni, “Doŋ aketi wek ibed kwaro rok mapol.” Cikke man doŋ gimoko i nyim Lubaŋa ma yam Abraim oye-ni, en Lubaŋa ma miyo kwo i kom jo muto, dok bene ma lwoŋo gin mogo ma yam komgi pe gibedo tye. 	For if those who depend on the law are heirs, faith means nothing and the promise is worthless,
Ka ce dano mo biwaco lok mo botwu, wubidokke iye ni ‘Rwot aye mitogi’, ci en bicwalogi kany oyotoyot.” 	Untie them and bring them to me.
Tic me kit pa dano ma nen woko ka maleŋ gin en: tim kwele, caro, tarwaŋ, 	But if you are led by the Spirit, you are not under the law.
obutto ni ryany caa 	it is very big and lying there 
tin watye ka gwac me kom otwa ki opuyu 	we are here plastering our house with the block clay
pien Lubaŋa pe ticce me kelo anyobanyoba, en gire won kuc. Macalo timme i cokke ducu pa lwak muye Yecu, ma gin jo pa Lubaŋa, 	For God is not a God of disorder but of peace—as in all the congregations of the Lord’s people.
adwoka tye iye moo madowong ki gin mukene ma geggo twoo i kom latin dyang	the first milk that comes immediately after the cow has calved, has a lot of fat in it and has antibodies against diseases for the protection of the calf
luditto maca pud peya gudok pacogi	those elders have not yet retuned to their homes
Rwot ogamo ni, “Aŋa ma lagwok-ot ma lagen dok ma laryeko, ma laditte biweko dano ducu ma bedo i ode i te locce, wek opok botgi camgi i kare ma mitte? 	The Lord answered, “Who then is the faithful and wise manager, whom the master puts in charge of his servants to give them their food allowance at the proper time?
Ento Anania odok iye ni, “Rwot, yam awinyo lok i kom dano man ki bot jo mapol pi kit ma otimo kwede joni marac i Jerucalem. 	“Lord,” Ananias answered, “I have heard many reports about this man and all the harm he has done to your holy people in Jerusalem.
Adong tye ki nying me pakke ma gilwongg go ni Acera, Adong —Acera	Adong has a name which praises her Acera, Adong — Acera
tye ka luurro kal i pany 	she is threshing the millet in the mortar in order to remove all the chaff from it
Miti ka oyac ci nywalo bal. Bal ka doŋ odoŋo muteggi nywalo to. 	Then, after desire has conceived, it gives birth to sin; and sin, when it is full-grown, gives birth to death.
lok me kenynye otuk woko 	his marriage affair has broken off
Lacen dok awinyo dwan ma oa ki i kin lee makwo aŋwen-ni kun loko ni, “Ŋano agwata acel welle ciliŋ abic, cayiri agwata adek welle ciliŋ abic ento moo ki koŋo vino pe ibalgi!” 	Then I heard what sounded like a voice among the four living creatures, saying, “Two pounds of wheat for a day’s wages, and six pounds of barley for a day’s wages, and do not damage the oil and the wine!”
Rwot genne, en bimiyowu teko, dok bigwokowu ki i kom gin marac. 	But the Lord is faithful, and he will strengthen you and protect you from the evil one.
Ento yam atito botwu ni, wun doŋ wunena, ento pe wuye. 	“Sir,” they said, “always give us this bread.”
ryeko omiyo ogerro ot madit 	intelligence made him build a big house 
in kitti rac 	you have bad manners 
poyo wiye pi nino meere me wot 	to remind him of the day of his journey 
ento ma ka timo meno, wuleg gum pa Lubaŋa obed i komgi, pien gilwoŋowu pi man, wek wunoŋ gum. 	Do not repay evil with evil or insult with insult
Maliam owaco ni, “Nen, an aŋeca pa Rwot	“I am the Lord’s servant,” Mary answered
Kit meno ŋat ma onoŋo obedo i wi pol-li oryeyo ciŋe i lobo ki pala kac, ci okayo gin mucek i lobo. 	So he who was seated on the cloud swung his sickle over the earth, and the earth was harvested.
Ci nen, boŋo kicika ma i ot pa Lubaŋa oyec opokke woko i dul aryo, cakke ki malo, nio kwede wa i tere piny. 	And when Jesus had cried out again in a loud voice, he gave up his spirit.
Ka ce imoto utmegini keken, ci noŋo itimo gin aŋo maber makato jo mukene? Lurok ma pe giŋeyo Lubaŋa-ni bene pe gitimo kit meno? 	And if you greet only your own people, what are you doing more than others? Do not even pagans do that?
Jo mapol ki i kingi guwaco ni, “En tye ki cen, opo apoya	The Jews who heard these words were again divided.
makko kit timme pa wonne 	to inherit the behaviour of his father
Gin mumiyo Won mara, pien amiyo kwona wek doki agam. 	The man runs away because he is a hired hand and cares nothing for the sheep.
lakwaaro konynyo daayo  	the granddaughter helps
eel ma rummo gang myerro borre obed puti adek keken 	the fence surrounding the house should be only three feet high 
ywerro wang pii  	clearing the water well so that it may run well
pillo wii latin nyo wii dako 	to spoil by over indulging a child or the wife
lok gin ducu ma imitto 	say all you want to say
kun jo maraco ki jo ma lugoba gibimedde ki bedo marac makato kare, kun gibwolo dano, gin bene gibibwologi. 	In fact, everyone who wants to live a godly life in Christ Jesus will be persecuted,
Otto nen callo pe mitto citto	it looks as if Otto does not want to go
Pien yam gicoyo ni, “Ŋat ma maro kwo, ki ma mito ni eri pi kare malac kun bedo maber. Ogwok lebe pe olok gin marac, ki doge bene pe olok lok me bwola. 	On the contrary, repay evil with blessing, because to this you were called so that you may inherit a blessing.
ngom ma kany pe twiyo lapena maber 	the pigeon peas does not germinate very well in the soil here
kapbad omokko woko i doggola I kare ma gitye ka wottone 	the cupboard got stuck in the doorway at the time when it was being removed out
pien opwonyogi calo ŋat ma tye ki twero, pe macalo lupwony-cik.	When Jesus had finished saying these things, the crowds were amazed at his teaching,
Ŋat ma mito laro kwone birwenyone, ento ŋat ma rwenyo kwone, bigwoko. 	Whoever tries to keep their life will lose it, and whoever loses their life will preserve it.
piny tin dyewor obutto mel 	it did not rain last night 
Ento atye ka tittiwu lok ada, ni, bibedo ber botwu ka an acito	Rather, you are filled with grief because I have said these things.
Ento ka giterowu i lukiko wek giŋol kop i komwu, pe wubed ka tamo kit lok aŋo ma wubilokone, ento wulok ma gibimiyowu i cawa meno	Whenever you are arrested and brought to trial, do not worry beforehand about what to say
anyira maditto gin aye gitwerro doyo polo man 	the older girls are the ones who can weed this field
wang latin pe leng 	the child's face is not clean
kado atwonna twerro twonne 	the alkaline salt can be strained
in latin ma tidi myerro pe iwotto otyeno	you small child, should not be walking in the evening
pirro yoo gudo	to level the road 
ka gonne i kingi kengi kuno 	they are booing each other for telling lies 
begga tin gubinno gumako lukwoo kany 	the detectives came and arrested some thieves here
Pe amito anen botwu macalo ŋat ma tye ka burowu ki waraga ma acoyogu. 	And we will be ready to punish every act of disobedience, once your obedience is complete.
kella orup wek akwiny ki bur me tyen dero 	bring me the worn out hoe so that I may dig the hole for the pole on which granary (will be planted)
ocitto ka ukko tutu 	the ostrich feathers are made into head gear which is worn on the head while dancing especially the Bwola dance
Ada awaco botwu ni, nio waŋ ma polo ki lobo bitum woko, latin ton mo acel, kadi ki nukuta mo acel me cik pe birwenyo, nio ka lok ducu ocobbe kakare. 	For truly I tell you, until heaven and earth disappear, not the smallest letter, not the least stroke of a pen, will by any means disappear from the Law until everything is accomplished.
kot ma laworo ocweer ki pee ni ogoyo pot anyogi oballo marac mada 	the rain that fell yesterday with the hailstones, destroyed the maize leaves completely 
opotto ci ogallo gut cingge	he fell and sprained his wrist
cittu wun bone wucibotti 	go also to lap up
Bot wun jo ducu ma wutye i Roma ma Lubaŋa marowu, dok olwoŋowu me bedo jone kikome: Lubaŋa Wonwa ki Rwotwa Yecu Kricito omiwu kica ki kuc. 	And you also are among those Gentiles who are called to belong to Jesus Christ.
meno aye gin mumiyo aneno jami ducu macalo gin ma konygi pe. Pe Kricito omiyo alokke adoko lacan jami ducu, dok anenogi calo yugi, wek anoŋ Kricito, 	What is more, I consider everything a loss because of the surpassing worth of knowing Christ Jesus my Lord, for whose sake I have lost all things
wubin i karama me nyom.” 	“Then he sent some more servants and said, ‘Tell those who have been invited that I have prepared my dinner: My oxen and fattened cattle have been butchered, and everything is ready
meno lagudi ma mwa pe twerro Iweny 	that one is a coward, he cannot fight 
Ento ŋat ma neno cik maber ma kelo kuc, ka ori iye, ma pe bedo calo ŋat ma winyo ka dok wiye wil woko, ento ŋat ma keto lok ma en owinyo i tic, gibimiye gum i gin ma en otiyo ducu. 	But whoever looks intently into the perfect law that gives freedom, and continues in it—not forgetting what they have heard, but doing it—they will be blessed in what they do.
Lubaŋa pa rok man, jo Icrael, yam oyero kwarowa, ci omiyo dano gunya madwoŋ i kare ma gubedo i Ejipt, ci oryeyo bade okwanyogi woko ki kunnu ki tek mere. 	The God of the people of Israel chose our ancestors; he made the people prosper during their stay in Egypt; with mighty power he led them out of that country;
geya ber mada me kongo 	sorghum is very good for brewing beer
miri en aye bilo me yen ma giwanggo iyo me ryekko owekko pe doko buro 	miri is a charcoal ot wood which is burnt in a special way to prevent it becoming ash
micon mere kany en aye me yenynyo lakwoo ma okwallo lim 	my official mission here is to find out the one who stole the money
nyig yat dong oteggi rommo apwonna 	the fruit is fully developed, mature and ready for harvesting
Ada awaco botwu ni, ŋat ma pe jolo ker pa Lubaŋa macalo latin matidi, pe bidonyo iye.” 	Truly I tell you, anyone who will not receive the kingdom of God like a little child will never enter it.”
Ka Elicabet owinyo mot pa Maliam, ci latin otiŋŋe ki i iye. Elicabet opoŋ ki Cwiny Maleŋ, 	When Elizabeth heard Mary’s greeting, the baby leaped in her womb, and Elizabeth was filled with the Holy Spirit.
Orwone lwak jo mapol ma yam gubino i nino madit guwinyo ni Yecu bino i Jerucalem. 	for on account of him many of the Jews were going over to Jesus and believing in him.
omiyo lok man obedo ka ywek i kin Lujudaya nio wa onyoo. 	So the soldiers took the money and did as they were instructed
peny ka en owinynyo lokke 	ask whether he heard about the case 
ogoyo wiye ni pac ci opwacco woko 	he hit his head with a loud sound and lacerated it
pinynye onongo dong lyet ki lee ma ger ma dong orumowa woko ma dano ma lagudi pe dong twero oo iye 	the atmosphere was so hot and tense with fierce animals surrounding us that a coward would not dare come near it
Gukwoŋo tere bot Anac, ma Kayapa onyomo nyare, ma onoŋo en ajwaka madit i mwaka meno. 	Jesus commanded Peter, “Put your sword away! Shall I not drink the cup the Father has given me?”
daa gin marac mada miyo dano doko latin 	quarrelling is a very bad thing, it makes a person to become a child 
Kono obedo ber bot dano meno ka gitweyo kidi rego i ŋute, gibolo kwede i nam, kato ma en weko ŋat acel i kin litino matino magi poto i bal. 	It would be better for them to be thrown into the sea with a millstone tied around their neck than to cause one of these little ones to stumble.
dano ma lagiri giri  	a short and stunted person
cit wunu ka jubbo kal matye i dyekal wuony i aduku ka wek dong wuony i dero 	go to scoop with your fingers the millet on the compounds, and pour it on the basket so that you may pour it into the barn 
ronynyo wangge ki i wang dirica ka nenno 	he glances through the window in order to see
ajog me cwallo lutukko mewa me odilo Kampala dong rommo adii? 	How much money has been collected for sending our football players to Kampala? 
Pe waomu cwiny Rwot, macalo jo mogo i komgi yam guomo cwinye, ci omiyo twol onekogi woko. 	We should not test Christ, as some of them did—and were killed by snakes.
kun atiyo ki Rwot ki mwolo ducu, ki pig waŋ, ki ayela mupoto i koma pi Lujudaya ma gupiro lok i koma. 	I served the Lord with great humility and with tears and in the midst of severe testing by the plots of my Jewish opponents.
gik lakit timmeni tin  	stop your type of behaviour from today
“Piŋo lupwonnyeni pe gilubo kit kwer pa ludoŋo? Pien gicamo cam ma pe gulwoko ciŋgi.” 	Then some Pharisees and teachers of the law came to Jesus from Jerusalem and asked,
ngat ma tye nono mope tye ka pwony en aye obin 	the one who is not teaching is the one who should come
cuk cwiny latin wek omak kwan matek 	encourage the child so that he may work hard at his study  
twoone pe cagge 	the disease cannot be cured
nene onoŋo atye munero, wuruko boŋo i koma, koma obedo lit, ci wubino ka lima, dok i kare ma atye i mabuc, wun wubino bota.’ 	I needed clothes and you clothed me, I was sick and you looked after me, I was in prison and you came to visit me.’
wang, mac oo  	fireplace for warming
dobo gunno cing danno  	leprosy causes loss of fingers 
gimiye rukca me citto gang 	he was given permission to go home
Ka man otum, Yecu ocito i Kapernaum kacel ki minne ki omegine ki lupwonnyene	Jesus said to the servants, “Fill the jars with water”; so they filled them to the brim.
bao ne tye ka gang woko, ka wubeddo ka wekko meja i ceng ci gang woko 	the table cracks, if you go on leaving it in the sun
rii en aye lee ma tyenne bocco dok gutte bene bor mada, komme obeddo ma otabbo tabbo macol wino yibbe bene bocco mada 	giraffe is an animal which has very long legs and also very long neck, its body is spotted with black spots, its tail hair is very long
danone lawirre ata pe tye gin mo ma en tiyo 	the man roams about without any particular work which he does 
lokke pe pide i kot 	the matter cannot be settled in court or the case cannot be taken to court
wun tika wanggi wucoyo gin mo?  	have you sown anything at all this time?
panggo odilo	to dodge the ball
lacoone tweggo leb Raciya mape wacce 	the man speaks Russian fluently and with great versatility
adada pe an ma atimmo	truly it is not I who have done or did it
Ento to ocako loc ki i kom Adam oo kwede wa i kom Moses, ci oloyo jo ma yam pe gutimo bal marom ki bal pa Adam, ma yam oturo cik ma gimiye. Adam aye lanyut ma cimo ŋat ma mito bino-ni. 	To be sure, sin was in the world before the law was given, but sin is not charged against anyone’s account where there is no law.
Bedo rom ki dano ma ocito welo. Ka yam a weko gaŋŋe, ci omiyo twero bot luticce, kun miyo ŋat acel acel ki ticce, kun ociko lagwok doggola ni obed ka kiyo piny. 	It’s like a man going away: He leaves his house and puts his servants in charge, each with their assigned task, and tells the one at the door to keep watch.
agola Bola mogo doki onen en aye ogegga binno 	there were some problems which prevented me from coming
ka ma acito iye, wun pe wutwero bino iye.” 	Once more Jesus said to them, “I am going away, and you will look for me, and you will die in your sin
otweyo Jon i mabuc, opoŋo kwede wi balle mukene ducu. 	Herod added this to them all: He locked John up in prison.
wacit wunno ka cam ba 	please let us go to eat
kot cakko cweer madowong i dwee me Mac 	rain starts falling heavily in the month of March
En buto piny i dyewor, dok a i dyeceŋ, ci kodi cako twi, doŋo, kun en pe ŋeyo kit ma timme kwede. 	Night and day, whether he sleeps or gets up, the seed sprouts and grows, though he does not know how.
geya ber mada me kongo 	sorghum is very good for beer 
Lacenne ka doŋ ociko lwak, odonyo i yeya, ci ocito i lobo Magadan.	The number of those who ate was four thousand men, besides women and children.
gupwoone tin ki cak mada 	they churned the milk very much today
tye ki cwiny me kica 	he has a kind heart 
gin ducu guriŋo i ka poro tuko kun giywayo Gayo ki Aristako, Lumakedonia ma yam guwoto kacel ki Paulo. 	The people seized Gaius and Aristarchus, Paul’s traveling companions from Macedonia, and all of them rushed into the theater together.
Ci Yecu odok iye botgi ni, “Lurem lanyom twero kumo ma noŋo lanyom pud tye kacel kwedgi? Kare bibino ma gibikwanyo lanyom woko ki botgi, ka doŋ gibiri kec i kare meno. 	Then John’s disciples came and asked him, “How is it that we and the Pharisees fast often, but your disciples do not fast?”
yet matek wek pe dokki odwong cen  	abuse or insult him very much so that he may not come back again
dano ka oa i dong twoo, ma dongge pud peya mitto cam, ninno ducu gimiine nyuka, ma ginuddo ma girubbo ki cwaa gin ma wac, wek oyub dongge, en aye matto 	when a person has just recovered from illness and still has no appetite
kot tye ka mwoc 	the rain is thundering 
cukari pud odong i gonia mitto ategga ka wek otum 	there is still some sugar in the gunny bag, it needs to be shaken or beaten to have all sugar out
“Piŋo pe wuŋolo gin ma tye atir piwu kenwu? 	“Why don’t you judge for yourselves what is right?
Nino ma Yecu orubo ŋom iye, oyabo ki waŋe, onoŋo ceŋ cabit. 	They brought to the Pharisees the man who had been blind.
yokko doggola	knocks the door
mwomme ki tek ka katto woko omiyo oyokko latin ma opotto ci oturro bade woko 	bursting out of the house and running away made him knock a child who fell and broke his arm
ringo ma otwoo twerro bkide doko mayom ka dong giteddo 	dried meat can be soaked in water to make it soft and then it is cooked
Kit meno kwaro ducu ma yam ginywalogi cakke ki i kom Abraim o kwede i kom Daudi, ducu onoŋo welgi romo apar wiye aŋwen, dok cakke ki i kom Daudi o wa i kare ma yam giterogi kwede i Babilon, onoŋo romo kwaro apar wiye aŋwen, dok cakke i kare ma giterogi kwede i Babilon o kwede wa i kom Kricito romo kwaro apar wiye aŋwen. 	Thus there were fourteen generations in all from Abraham to David, fourteen from David to the exile to Babylon, and fourteen from the exile to the Messiah.
Jo ma yam guket i kare me libo ma ocakke i kom Citefano-ni guwoto nio wa Poiniki ki Caiprac ki Antiokia, kun pe gitito lok bot ŋat mo, kono bot Lujudaya keken. 	Now those who had been scattered by the persecution that broke out when Stephen was killed traveled as far as Phoenicia, Cyprus and Antioch, spreading the word only among Jews.
Wapwoyo Lubaŋa jwijwi piwu ducu kun walwoŋo nyiŋwu i legawa me kare ducu, 	We always thank God for all of you and continually mention you in our prayers.
yec pa anyira nino ducu pe tye atir 	the consent of the girls is always not straight
En mumiyo Lubaŋa otenyogi woko liyak i miti me caro ma tye i cwinygi, wek gubal kwede deyo me komgi kekengi. 	and exchanged the glory of the immortal God for images made to look like a mortal human being and birds and animals and reptiles.
nen anyogi Ma otwooni ka ber ma twerro jiye wek gimwoddi 	see whether the dried maize is good enough to be partially cooked so that it can be eaten
lab Baba woko ki i wang it 	remove the mud from the well
I kare ma Petero iye tye ka lwodo pi lek man, Cwiny Maleŋ owacce ni, “Nen, jo adek gitye ka yenyo in. 	While Peter was still thinking about the vision, the Spirit said to him, “Simon, three men are looking for you.
Pi ribbewa ki Kricito Yecu en ocerowa woko kacel kwede, ka doŋ oketowa wabedo kacel kwede i polo. 	made us alive with Christ even when we were dead in transgressions—it is by grace you have been saved.
ngaa ma tye kenynyo 	who is there? 
Cutcut ajwaka madit pa Lubaŋa oa malo ci owacci, “Pe idok iye lok mo? Kit lok aŋo ma jo-ni gudoti kwede-ni?” 	Then the high priest stood up and said to Jesus, “Are you not going to answer? What is this testimony that these men are bringing against you?”
Lupwonnyene gupo lok ma yam gicoyo ni, “Arima pi odi mito neka woko.” 	To those who sold doves he said, “Get these out of here! Stop turning my Father’s house into a market!”
ka yam gimako lokka, gibimako mewu bene. 	Remember what I told you: ‘A servant is not greater than his master.’ If they persecuted me, they will persecute you also
Omara dong ocunynyo latin otte mo ma en beddo iye 	Omara has already erected a small house into which he is staying
jullo genggi beddo ki lurem  	moodiness prevents you from having friends
kel gweno acel keken	bring only one chicken
pien onoŋo alwori, pien in i dano magwa	I was afraid of you, because you are a hard man
obot tyen gall okatto kany 	someone's footprints have passed here
poyo wiye pi nino meere me wot	to remind him of the day of his journey 
pe dok an ma akwo-ni, ento Kricito aye ma bedo kwo i iya. Kwo ma kombeddi atye kwede i komani, abedo kwo pi ye Wod pa Lubaŋa, ma ceŋ omara ka omine gire pire kene pira. 	I have been crucified with Christ and I no longer live, but Christ lives in me
litino myerro pe wutuk i kom abila pa woora pien biballo komwu woko	children should not play on my father's ancestral shrine because it will bring curse on you
wotto ma tune kore yegge ni yaka yaka  	walks with her turgid breasts shaking up and down
ma naka yam peya wabedo opii pa ŋatti mo. Man doŋ in iwaco niŋniŋ ni, ‘Gibigonyowu’?” 	They answered him, “We are Abraham’s descendants and have never been slaves of anyone
ringo opego lemmo cwinynye ka ocammo 	whenever he eats pork he feels sick or nauseatic, that is, he feels like vomiting 
pii twerro birre i agulo man maber abera 	the water can very well be filled in this pot 
en tye ka jacco nyim caa 	there she is grinding the simsim 
gikello pud nyen 	been newly or recently brought 
otwit outto latin gweno  	the hawk has snatched a chick
obeddo obollo gutte caa 	he is sitting there with his long neck 
nen in nene myero pe itim kimeno 	look, you should not have done like that
mot me odiko 	morning greeting 
anyira gitye ka dinno belgi i wii pata 	the girls are threshing their millet on the flat rock
dano ne gwaa 	the man is rough and fierce
Me agikkine, utmega, wubed ki yomcwiny i Rwot. An pe aol gira me nwoyo coyo lok ma yam koŋ acoyo botwu, dok bene twero jukowu miyo pe wupoto i gin marac. 	since you are going through the same struggle you saw I had, and now hear that I still have.
gilirine dong ocokko cilo keken 	her aluminium ear-rings are full of dirt 
an ma akwoggo oo, en oo awe 	I was the first to come, he came behind me
Man lok me caden ma Jon obolo, ka Lujudaya guoro ajwagi ki jo Levi nia Jerucalem pi penye ni, “In aŋa?” 	For the law was given through Moses; grace and truth came through Jesus Christ.
beddo ma mwollo bonone i komme 	sits with the dress well pushed round the legs to prevent exposure of the private parts
iyo dano mape opwonynye ka gilwongge gammoni ee nyo ni ngoo 	a person who is not well bred when he is called he answers
orwoo woko me citto ka dongge 	he gave up taking part in for boxing 
en puk con mada ka citto katic 	he rises very early to go to work 
dano pe mitto ngalla  	people do not like to despise others 
Dok owaco ni, “Wabiporo ker pa Lubaŋa ki kit gin aŋo? Nyo wabinyuto ki kit carolok aŋo? 	Again he said, “What shall we say the kingdom of God is like, or what parable shall we use to describe it?
Ento Lucamaria pe gujole, pien waŋe okemo Jerucalem. 	but the people there did not welcome him, because he was heading for Jerusalem.
“Ka ŋat mo obino bota, ma kun pe okwero wonne ki minne, dakone ki litinone, omegine ki nyimegine, kadi wa kwone kikome, pe twero bedo lapwonynyena. 	“If anyone comes to me and does not hate father and mother, wife and children, brothers and sisters—yes, even their own life—such a person cannot be my disciple.
litino gubeddo ka yullu wii ot me mokko mac 	the children have been pulling off grass from the root of the but for lighting the fire
pele pa latin meno owekko opotto oturo tyene	the restlessness of the child made her fall and broke her leg 
gwor bur man wek obed malac ma rommo tee tagi 	widen this hole to fit the base of a water tank
anga ma owaci oyo odok rwot	whoever suggested that rats should become chiefs
pe twerro onynye i poto ature kany 	the water can be poured in this flower garden
tin gitye ka nyonne mada 	today they are fighting each other very badly 
agaa ma okwanynyo kalam meerra woke?	who took my pen? 
min ngati ber rom mene pe kato meni	somebody else's mother, however good to you she may be, she can never be better than your own mother
Pe wuŋeyo ni jo pa Lubaŋa aye ma biŋolo kop i kom dano me lobo? Ka wun kulu aye ma wubiŋolo kop i kom lobo, ci pe wuromo ŋolo kop mogo matitinone piwu kenwu? 	Or do you not know that the Lord’s people will judge the world? And if you are to judge the world, are you not competent to judge trivial cases?
Aciki i nyim Lubaŋa ki i nyim Kricito Yecu ma biŋolo kop pa jo makwo ki jo muto, dok pi dwogone ki pi locce, ni meno, 	and that they will come to their senses and escape from the trap of the devil, who has taken them captive to do his will.
jo Banyoro ki jo Baganda gimaarro cammo ocene twatwal, meno aye cam ma pire tek mada 	the Banyoro and the Baganda love very much to eat grasshoppers, that is their delicacy
Latin odoŋo, tek omedde i cwinye, obedo i tim nio i nino ma ginyute iye bot jo Icrael.	And the child grew and became strong in spirit; and he lived in the wilderness until he appeared publicly to Israel.
lapag cata en aye dano ma mal ata mape tye ki kama beddo iye nyo tiyo iye 	a stupid and useless person who roams about helplessly and has no where to stay or does any work
yabbo kom latwoo 	uncovering the patient
ibutto nignig ladwog 	Sir how did you sleep? 
tye ka juggo bongone ka wek ekwoo ma romme 	he is reducing the size of his cloth so that he may make it to fit him
dong can dong ogele 	one part of the brim of the plate is broken
gitiyo ki tongo bene me cweyo karatac 	papyrus is also used for making paper
gin ma twerro poyo wiye me coyo waraga diki 	something that will remind him tomorrow to write the letter
bii pii ma i bongoni ka dong imoo 	squeeze the water out of this cloth and then put it out to dry 
Pe wuŋeyo ni, jo ma gitiyo tic i ot pa Lubaŋa ginoŋo camgi ki i ot pa Lubaŋa, dok jo ma gitiyo i kom keno tyer gipoko botgi gitum ma gityero? 	Don’t you know that those who serve in the temple get their food from the temple, and that those who serve at the altar share in what is offered on the altar?
ka gimitti laput ocang oyot ci myerro gimiine cam ma tye iye ringo ki cak madowong 	if a malnourished child is wanted to heal quickly, she must be given plenty of meat and milk
Pien wan aye jo mulirre me ada, wan jo ma waworo Lubaŋa i Cwiny Maleŋ, dok ma wawakke i Kricito Yecu, kun pe watye ki gen mo i kom gin ma nen ki woko. 	Watch out for those dogs, those evildoers, those mutilators of the flesh.
pe ber me teddo ki bilo i ot pien kello latuk i ot 	it is not good to cook with charcoal in the house because it brings in soot 
Dok bene myero en omak matek lok pa Lubaŋa me ada ma yam gipwonye kwede, ma miyo en twero cuko cwiny dano ki pwony me ada, dok twero loyo tam pa jo ma pyem kwede. 	Rather, he must be hospitable, one who loves what is good, who is self-controlled, upright, holy and disciplined.
Lwak jo mapol ducu gunene ka woto kun pako kwede Lubaŋa, 	When all the people saw him walking and praising God,
pe konynyo me beddo kany, cit ka mal i tim kuno nyo wek gwok inog iye tic kuno 	don't stay here, go to roam in the foreign country where you might get some work there
Warabo ŋet Kurete ki tek ka wao i kabedo ma gilwoŋo ni Waŋ Wat Mabeco, ma cok ki gaŋ ma nyiŋe Lacea. 	We moved along the coast with difficulty and came to a place called Fair Havens, near the town of Lasea.
Ento kit macalo obedo pyem i kom lok mogo nyo nyiŋ mogo ma dok i kom cik ma mewu-ni, wun aye wunen giwu kite	But since it involves questions about words and names and your own law—settle the matter yourselves
lyedi man lakke pe bit 	this razor is blunt 
Lok me kwena ma yam lumalaika gukelo onoŋo omoko matek. Ka ŋat mo okalo wi cik mo, nyo okwero winyo, gimiye can iye ma oporo bal ma en obalo. 	For since the message spoken through angels was binding, and every violation and disobedience received its just punishment,
Wek tin Kricito, ma kabaka me Icrael, olor piny ki i kom yatariya, wek wanen ka wacak ye.” Wa jo ma gigurogi kacel kwede bene gucaye. 	Let this Messiah, this king of Israel, come down now from the cross, that we may see and believe.” Those crucified with him also heaped insults on him.
ento ka ma bal onya iye, en bene ka ma kica onya iye makato ducu-ni. 	The law was brought in so that the trespass might increase
Gibilego Lubaŋa piwu bene kun cwinygi paro piwu, pi kica pa Lubaŋa madit ma okato kare ma doŋ onen i komwu. 	Because of the service by which you have proved yourselves, others will praise God for the obedience that accompanies your confession of the gospel of Christ, and for your generosity in sharing with them and with everyone else.
awobi janynyo wiye ki laket 	the boy raises up his hair by combing it
ogil en aye ogwang ma maarro makko gweno twatwal 	civet cat is one of the predators that likes very much to catch the chicken
wek gwok nyo ami nyeko omak jo me rokka, ka wek alar jo mogo ki i kingi. 	But if their transgression means riches for the world, and their loss means riches for the Gentiles, how much greater riches will their full inclusion bring!
obeddo ka jwang go lokke atata 	he did not make a clear statement
Jo mogo guwaco ni, “En kikome”	His neighbors and those who had formerly seen him begging asked, “Isn’t this the same man who used to sit and beg?”
pok labolo man ka dong link ki latin ocam 	peel this banana and then give it to the child to eat
Dano acel acel myero obed ki kite macon ma onoŋo en tye kwede i kare ma gilwoŋe. 	Each person should remain in the situation they were in when God called them.
ka wutiyo matek ci yugi ducu matye kany twerro jubbe tum 	if you work very hard, all the rubbish which is here can be collected
ocammo ringo ni raku raku	he ate the meat with great relish
Pi meno myero wukwany jami lweny ducu ma Lubaŋa miyo, wek obikonywu me cuŋo matek i nino marac, pud wubicuŋ ma noŋo doŋ wuyelle i kit yo ducu. 	For our struggle is not against flesh and blood, but against the rulers, against the authorities, against the powers of this dark world and against the spiritual forces of evil in the heavenly realms.
An yam pe aŋuny adok ki ŋeya aweko tuco lok mo botwu ma twero konyowu, kun apwonyowu i dye lwak ki i ot ki ot. 	You know that I have not hesitated to preach anything that would be helpful to you but have taught you publicly and from house to house.
“I kare meno ker me polo gibiporo ki anyira apar ma yam gutero taragi, gucito ka jolo lanyom. 	“At that time the kingdom of heaven will be like ten virgins who took their lamps and went out to meet the bridegroom.
labwammi nino ducu nen ki mit dogge me bwollo dano 	a swindler is always known by the sweetness of his words for deceiving the people 
Ento i dyewor lamalaika pa Rwot oyabo dog ot mabuc, ci okelogi woko kun waco ni, 	But during the night an angel of the Lord opened the doors of the jail and brought them out.
labwoto i yobbo caa 	an expert in repairing watches 
lagalo nyo ajogamiya kayo dano malit mada 	the bites of mbwa fly are very painful
Lubaŋa yam ocero Rwot woko ki i kin jo muto, en bicerowa woko bene pi twerone. 	By his power God raised the Lord from the dead, and he will raise us also.
gwok loyo ki yibe	a dog is better than so and so by its tail
Lubaŋa ma aworo ki i cwinya kun bene atito lok me kwena maber i kom Wode, en aye cadenna ma ŋeyo ni atuco nyiŋwu i legana i kare ducu ma pe akeŋ. 	First, I thank my God through Jesus Christ for all of you, because your faith is being reported all over the world.
Ka oloko lok man, jo mapol guye en. 	So Jesus said, “When you have lifted up the Son of Man, then you will know that I am he and that I do nothing on my own but speak just what the Father has taught me.
anyira gimaarro tungii mada me nenne kit ma girukke lovedde nyo kit ma giyubbo ki yer wiigi 	the girls like very much the mirror for looking at how they are dressed or how they have made the hair on their heads
mukene twoo twatwal ka dong gitye ka tii 	some people suffer very much when they are aging 
Giŋeyo nia wa con, ka giye tucone, ni abedo ka lubo kit pa lugwok dini matek makato ma i kinwa, ma gin aye Luparicayo. 	They have known me for a long time and can testify, if they are willing, that I conformed to the strictest sect of our religion, living as a Pharisee.
yadi dong guluk guummo gang woko owekko gang dong pe nen 	the trees have grown too much and have covered the home, that is why the home cannot be seen
tye ki cwiny maber 	he has a good heart
pe itye kakwan maber, myerro icoo woko, pe ibed ka tukko atuka ki kwan 	if you are not doing well, you must wake up, and not to play with studying 
pien en pe bilok pire kene, ento gin ducu ma en biwinyo, biwaco botwu, bitittiwu gin ma bitimme anyim. 	But when he, the Spirit of truth, comes, he will guide you into all the truth
ento dano meno ma dobo Wod pa dano bineno can!” 	But woe to that man who betrays him!”
Pien yam gikwano en i kinwa, en bene obedo i dog tic man.” 	He was one of our number and shared in our ministry.”
girom ki yadi ma nyiggi pe nen i kare me cekgi, ma giputo lwitgi woko, yam guto kiryo. 	These people are blemishes at your love feasts, eating with you without the slightest qualm—shepherds who feed only themselves
ladit Ica potto pe ber 	it is not good for an elderly person to fall
pukko cukari madowong mada i cai mere ka dong matto	pours a lot of sugar in his tea and then takes it 
genno ni bkiwogo diki 	hoping that he will come back tomorrow 
wamittto dano ma katto ka tic ni wici-wici ma komgi mit 	we want people who go out working with zeal and speed 
olwoddo lokke i cwinynye ci ononggo ni lokke pe ber 	he pondered on the matter in his mind and found out that it was not good
yito ma aa i kom gin ma pat pat raccu mada  	the smokes that come from various things are very dangerous
jamine ducu tiyo jara jara 	she does all her work carelessly 
Ka obino i ot, pe oye ni dano mo odony kwede i ot, kono Petero ki Jon, ki Yakobo, ki won latin ki minne keken. 	When he arrived at the house of Jairus, he did not let anyone go in with him except Peter, John and James, and the child’s father and mother.
gitye ka larro wang poto meegi 	they are disputing or quarrelling about the boundary of their fields
Gin jo ma pe giye-nu, lubaŋa me lobo man doŋ oumo tamgi woko wek pe gunen leŋo me lok me kwena maber i kom deyo pa Kricito, ma en cal pa Lubaŋa kikome. 	And even if our gospel is veiled, it is veiled to those who are perishing.
pi teko ma onen i kom lanyut mogo ki taŋo mogo, pi tek pa Cwiny Maleŋ. 	I will not venture to speak of anything except what Christ has accomplished through me in leading the Gentiles to obey God by what I have said and done—
Cimeon olego gum i komgi, kun waco bot minne Maliam ni, “Nen, latin man giketo wek Luicrael mapol opoti, wek gua doki ki me bedo lanyut ma giyeto, 	Then Simeon blessed them and said to Mary, his mother: “This child is destined to cause the falling and rising of many in Israel, and to be a sign that will be spoken against,
olokko ka dongga, donggi, dongge .	he spoke according to my, your, his words
abaa tye i ot ka imitto nenne	my father is in the house if you want to see him
abilig gullo bwoyo ki i tee bwomme	abilig emits foul smelling foam from beneath it's wings 
Ento ryeko mua ki malo, mukwoŋo bedo leŋ, dok bedo me kuc, me mwolo, gamo tam ducu mabeco, opoŋ ki kica, ki nyako nyig maber, ŋat ma tye kwede pe poko kin dano, bedo ma cwinye atir. 	But the wisdom that comes from heaven is first of all pure; then peace-loving, considerate, submissive, full of mercy and good fruit, impartial and sincere.
Ka doŋ otyeko lok, ci owaco bot Cimon ni, “Kwaŋ icit i kut, wubol obwowu wumak rec.” 	One day as Jesus was standing by the Lake of Gennesaret, the people were crowding around him and listening to the word of God.
dano gitye ka guure i paco pa Ojok 	the people are assembling at Ojok's home 
beddo guci gin me kec kom mada 	to be a slave is of a great misfortune
nen tokke ma oyonne kwedde	look at her neck which is tall and curving forwards
nyelo oriine matek i kom apwoyo 	python has coiled itself tightly round the hare
Onoŋo en dano maber ma opoŋ ki Cwiny Maleŋ ki niye. Ci lwak jo mapol gumedde bot Rwot. 	He was a good man, full of the Holy Spirit and faith, and a great number of people were brought to the Lord.
Iaa jubi dok ginong mada en aye wekko gitimmo me beddo kwot 	buffalo's hide is very thick and that is why shield are made from it 
komme ogollo ad ari callo kom Iagwar 	its body is cross striped, like that of zebra
pud tye ki tino omiyo lokko kumeno	he is still childish behaviour that is why he talks 
i kare macon otegga Lamogi ononggo giwotto ki juro atero ma gutinggo i isegi 	long time ago the leaders of the Lamogi clan used to walk with the quivers of the arrows carried on their backs
ticce meyo kom dano 	the work enervates the people 
wulaggo wunu dano ki pii oyot oyot baa 	please do help the people quickly with some water 
Pala lucan mabit okatti ki i dogge, ma en bineko ki lurok woko ducu, ka doŋ bibedo ka loyogi ki odoo nyonyo	Coming out of his mouth is a sharp sword with which to strike down the nations
“Gitye ki gum jo ma cwinygi leŋ, pien gin aye gibineno Lubaŋa. 	Blessed are the pure in heart, for they will see God.
Man gin mumiya aweki i Kurete, ni wek iyub gin ma yam odoŋ ma pe tye kakare, dok iket ludoŋo i gaŋi madoŋo ducu, kit ma nene aciki kwede ca. 	To Titus, my true son in our common faith: Grace and peace from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Savior.
pii ne ber twerro ukke ki dong 	the bees fell upon him and covered him 
minne okano lok meno ducu i cwinye. 	But his mother treasured all these things in her heart.
gun ber mada me geddo 	the laterite volcanic stones are very good for buildings
Pien latel, macalo en lagwok jami pa Lubaŋa, myero obed dano ma lok marac mo pe i kome. Myero pe obed ŋat ma nyatte, nyo ma kiniga mako oyotoyot, nyo lamero, nyo lakolo, kadi laworo me noŋo lim. 	An elder must be blameless, faithful to his wife, a man whose children believe and are not open to the charge of being wild and disobedient.
tung pa Okema gi en  	here is the home of Okema
Pi meno ŋat mo ma tamo ni etwero cuŋ myero ogwokke wek pe opoti. 	So, if you think you are standing firm, be careful that you don’t fall!
gubitte ki nyako mo maleng magicwallo butte ma obeddo'ka bwolle ni emitte oweko gimakke 	he was decoyed by a beautiful girl, who was sent to him, to deceive him that she loves him, that is why he was captured
Dano ma tiyo gin ma Lubaŋa mito, en aye omera, ki lamera, ki maa.”	Whoever does God’s will is my brother and sister and mother.”
Lakwor ma ocoyogi aye Catan	and the enemy who sows them is the devil
goyo odilo me pyem tin tye i baar me Awac 	the champion football competition is taking place today at Awac's football ground 
nino yuttu wangge 	he feels sleepy 
Lweny lweny maber me niye	But you, man of God, flee from all this, and pursue righteousness, godliness, faith, love, endurance and gentleness.
Bedo ber mada ka pe icamo riŋo, nyo kadi ki mato koŋo, nyo tiyo gin mo ma bimiyo omeru poto. 	Let us therefore make every effort to do what leads to peace and to mutual edification.
pien awacciwu ni, i polo kuca lumalaikagi neno waŋ Wora ma tye i polo kare ducu. 	For I tell you that their angels in heaven always see the face of my Father in heaven.
putto gwana	uprooting the cassava
Ka nino okato mapol, ci Lujudaya gucokke, gupiro lok me neke. 	After many days had gone by, there was a conspiracy among the Jews to kill him,
ringo ma okwok mitto kong jic ka dong gitallo ka miyo beddo maber 	a smelling meat, must first be half cooked and then smoked
gimaarro ocunga mada omiyo wa i i Ododo pa Acoli tye iye ododo kom anyira apar, ma gucitto ka pwonno ocunga 	ocunga is very much liked, that is why it is even in the Acholi tales there is a tale about ten girls who went to pluck the ocunga
pud olimmo waraga ma oa ki botte laworo 	he just got the letter from him yesterday paper for writing 
pe jami ducu ma ryeny en aye dayamon 	not all the things that shine are diamond
Ogamo ni, “Lujudaya guyubbe me penyi wek iter Paulo botgi i Lukiko, ma nen calo gimito ni gimed penyo lok i kome wek guniaŋ iye maber. 	He said: “Some Jews have agreed to ask you to bring Paul before the Sanhedrin tomorrow on the pretext of wanting more accurate information about him.
pien en obedo ma tamme aryo, ma pe cuŋ matek i kit yo me kwone ducu. 	Such a person is double-minded and unstable in all they do.
wek elonygi gubed leŋ, ma doŋ otyeko lwokogi ki pii ki lok, 	Husbands, love your wives, just as Christ loved the church and gave himself up for her
tye ka jabbo wang bur 	he is swabbing the ulcer
tammo pi gin ma etimmo? 	is he thinking or pondering about what he did?
ocitto ka ngiyo leela me awilla 	he went to select a bicycle for buying 
mwar kwon maadit ka wek igwee ki olel maber 	cut a large amount of kwon so that you may scoop simsim sauce with it 
litino gitye ka botto nyuka caa 	the children are lapping up porridge there
obeddo ni met piny caa 	he sat heavily down there 
Deyo obed bot Lubaŋa nakanaka, ma en keken aye won ryeko, pi Yecu Kricito. Amen.	but now revealed and made known through the prophetic writings by the command of the eternal God, so that all the Gentiles might come to the obedience that comes from faith—
wii dero 	granary cover 
dano madit myerro pe daa atata 	an elder should not be quarrelling from time to time 
pien ŋat ma mere tye gibimedde, ŋat ma mere pe, gibikwanyo woko ki bote kadi wa gin ma en tamo ni etye kwede.” 	Whoever has will be given more; whoever does not have, even what they think they have will be taken from them.”
Yecu onoŋo peya oo i gaŋ-ŋu, ento onoŋo pud tye ka ma Marita oromo iye kwede. 	When Mary heard this, she got up quickly and went to him.
Wun wutero ye niŋniŋ, ka ŋat acel limo deyo ki bot lawote, ento pe wuyenyo deyo ma a bot Lubaŋa ma en acel keken? 	“I do not accept glory from human beings,
miyo tyer me dyel 	offering a goat
ento ŋat ma giweko balle manok, marre nok. 	But whoever has been forgiven little loves little.”
ci openyogi ni, “Wun yam wulimo Cwiny Maleŋ i kare ma wuye Kricito?” Gugamo ni, “Pe, wan peya wawinyo ni Cwiny Maleŋ tye.” 	and asked them, “Did you receive the Holy Spirit when you believed?” They answered, “No, we have not even heard that there is a Holy Spirit.”
puu dye ot man diki ki opuyu ma girnbbo ki cet dyang, pien dong olurre woko 	smear the floor of this house tomorrow with the black soil mixed with cow dung because it is worn out now 
ka ce wumito ye lokke en aye Elia ma myero obin-ni. 	And if you are willing to accept it, he is the Elijah who was to come.
lakke ma omukki mitto acomma ki lak ayubba	his tooth that has broken, needs to be replaced with an artificial tooth
maar en aye gin acel ma dano acel acel myerro obed kwede i cwinynye 	love is the one thing that everyone should have in his heart
cwinya yutte me lweny kwedde 	I feel like fighting him 
takko wii kongo me abila	removing a small quantity of beer for tasting
lalukka lee ma lubbo lee ki obot tyen gi  	a tracker of animal who tracks the animals by their tracks
Lubaŋa aye obedo cadenna ma ŋeyo ni, par matut ma abedo kwede piwu a i mar pa Kricito Yecu kikome. 	It is right for me to feel this way about all of you, since I have you in my heart and, whether I am in chains or defending and confirming the gospel, all of you share in God’s grace with me.
lwonggo gwokke ki lwiyo keken	likes very much whistling
pe myero ituc mung pa ngat mo 	do not let out the secret of somebody 
put okuto woko ki i tyen latin 	pull out the thorn from the child's foot
nang cukari en 	lick this sugar 
Yecu ool ki wot, ci obedo piny i ŋet waŋ it. Onoŋo doŋ cawa oromo ka abicel. 	Jacob’s well was there, and Jesus, tired as he was from the journey, sat down by the well
ot oyoo man twerro culle 	this rat's hole can be blocked
Wutamo iye lok aŋo?” Gudokke iye ni, “Balle romme to.” 	What do you think?” “He is worthy of death,” they answered.
ature man doki akura ne dwog mada, dok kuur mada 	this flower has a very sweet smell
beddo kany nono labongo tic me 	staying here without toy work
pii ni molle pe tye maber 	the flowing of this water is not good
nga ma omiye 	who made her pregnant 
Ka kare oromo, ci ocako cwalo laticce bot lupur ka omo nyige mucekke i potone. 	At harvest time he sent a servant to the tenants to collect from them some of the fruit of the vineyard.
Ka piny oru, ci luloc ki ludoŋo ki lupwony-cik gucokke i Jerucalem, 	The next day the rulers, the elders and the teachers of the law met in Jerusalem.
Kit meno Rwot ŋeyo laro dano ma gilworo Lubaŋa ki i ayelayela ma giomo kwede cwinygi dok ŋeyo gwoko jo ma kitgi pe atir ka ma giketo iye can i komgi nio ka nino me ŋolo kop oromo, 	if this is so, then the Lord knows how to rescue the godly from trials and to hold the unrighteous for punishment on the day of judgment.
Ento Caulo onoŋo mito ni etyek lwak jo muye Kricito woko ducu	But Saul began to destroy the church
Ka guo ma gukemo Micia, ci gutemo dok tuŋ Bitinia, ento Cwiny pa Yecu pe oye ki gin, 	When they came to the border of Mysia, they tried to enter Bithynia, but the Spirit of Jesus would not allow them to.
Yecu dok ogamo doge owacci, “Yam bene gicoyo ni, ‘Pe iom i Rwot Lubaŋani.’ ” 	Jesus answered him, “It is also written: ‘Do not put the Lord your God to the test.’”
Macalo yam akwoŋo ki kiniga, ‘Gin pe bidonyo i yweyo bota.’ ” 	So I declared on oath in my anger, ‘They shall never enter my rest.’ ”
Ento i kare ma Paulo mito ŋamo doge ka lok, Galio owaco ki Lujudaya ni, “Ka onoŋo lok man ocuŋ i kom tim mo marac, nyo kom bal mo marac, onoŋo myero awiny kokowu, wun Lujudaya. 	Just as Paul was about to speak, Gallio said to them, “If you Jews were making a complaint about some misdemeanor or serious crime, it would be reasonable for me to listen to you.
I kare ma Yecu doŋ otyeko loko carolok magi, oa woko ki kunnu, 	When Jesus had finished these parables, he moved on from there.
Dok ocikowa ni watiti lok ki dano kun wamiyo caden ni, man aye ŋat ma yam Lubaŋa oyero me bedo laŋolkop pa jo makwo ki jo muto. 	He commanded us to preach to the people and to testify that he is the one whom God appointed as judge of the living and the dead.
Ento ka Yakobo owinyo ni kal tye i Ejipt, ci ocwalo kwarowa kunnu tyen mukwoŋo. 	When Jacob heard that there was grain in Egypt, he sent our forefathers on their first visit.
Ento Yecu onenogi ci owaco botgi ni, “Ki bot dano man pe twerre, ento ki bot Lubaŋa jami ducu twerre.” 	Jesus looked at them and said, “With man this is impossible, but with God all things are possible.”
Aciro dano ma cirro lok mada kono dong oa woko ki bot cwaarre 	Aciro is a woman who does endures very much, otherwise she would have left her husband 
Jo mapol i kin Lujudaya ma gubino kacel ki Maliam, ka guneno gin ma Yecu otiyo, guye en. 	When he had said this, Jesus called in a loud voice, “Lazarus, come out!”
dano ma mwammo lok myerro pe beddo i kin dano 	a man who blurts out secrets should not be among people 
bur aryec tye inyimmi kenynyo, ka iwoto gwokke, pe ipot iye 	be careful when walking, there is a deep oblique hole in front of you, you might fall into it
pii awobe ni wek gubed ki cwiny me pyem me loyo odilo nyo me medde me citto malo i tukko mukene ducu 	incite the boys to have the spirit of winning in the football and increasing power of going up in all other sports
Pi niye bene omiyo en okwero nino madit me Kato, dok okiro remo, wek omi lanek litino kayo pe ogudgi. 	By faith he kept the Passover and the application of blood, so that the destroyer of the firstborn would not touch the firstborn of Israel.
wadiyo cwinywa i lok ducu wek pe omi waket ariya mo ma geŋo tito lok me kwena maber i kom Kricito. 	On the contrary, we put up with anything rather than hinder the gospel of Christ.
lobone ber twerro padde me agulu 	the clay is good therefore it can be made or moulded for pots
komme poo ni rik rik 	his body jerks excitedly
Pien abitimo botgi kica i timgi maraco ducu, pe dok abipo i kom balgi mo kadi ki acel.” 	For I will forgive their wickedness and will remember their sins no more.”
pwaa winyo woko ki i poto kal 	stir or chase the birds away from the millet field
Ci en ocaŋo lutwo mapol ma onoŋo gitye ki kwa two mapatpat, kun ryemo ki lwak cen-gu mapol	and Jesus healed many who had various diseases
O bolo botgi carolok ma pwonyogi ni myero guleg jwijwi, guwek ol. 	Then Jesus told his disciples a parable to show them that they should always pray and not give up.
Ento ka guye lok me kwena maber ma Pilipo otito i kom ker pa Lubaŋa ki i kom Yecu Kricito, ci gibatijagi, co wa ki mon. 	But when they believed Philip as he proclaimed the good news of the kingdom of God and the name of Jesus Christ, they were baptized, both men and women.
Nyo wan ki Barnaba keken aye myero wati pi camwa piwa kenwa? 	Or is it only I and Barnabas who lack the right to not work for a living?
Pien ŋat ma mere tye, gibimedde, ŋat ma mere pe gibikwanyo woko ki bote kadi wa gin ma en tye kwede ducu.” 	Whoever has will be given more; whoever does not have, even what they have will be taken from them.”
wil tyen genggo dano tukko odilo 	spraining of foot prevents people from playing football 
okatti woko ludok ki ot 	he came out from the house stark naked 
gitye ka totto kic 	they are taking honey
dano mape tye ki gin mo ma tiyo, wiye twerro bodde oyot mada 	a person who has nothing to do, can easily be distracted 
Petero ki lapwonnye meno mukene gumako yo, gucito i lyel. 	So she came running to Simon Peter and the other disciple, the one Jesus loved, and said, “They have taken the Lord out of the tomb, and we don’t know where they have put him!”
rab ki nget kulu, poto ki gang 	go along the river, fields, and outside the home 
Omiyo Pilato oŋolo kop ni myero gitim Yecu kit macalo gimito. 	So Pilate decided to grant their demand.
pii opong ma tye ka mette wa wii tera  	the volume of water has increased greatly and is spilling all over the land
Jo mogo guŋak woko ki i lok man ci gudonyo ka boko lok atata ma konnye pe. 	The goal of this command is love, which comes from a pure heart and a good conscience and a sincere faith.
jun coo nino ducu beddo yer 	a man's chin always has hair
nywanno lok woko ki i kot	mixing up evidence in court 
jub oboke ducu ma kany icionygi woko 	collect all the leaves which are here and pour them outside 
tekko waragi i gilac	to pour waragi in glasses in equal proportion
Ka pe doŋ aneno piny pi dero meno ma ocaro waŋa, ci jo ma gitye kweda gupeya ki ciŋa nio wa i Damaciko. 	My companions led me by the hand into Damascus, because the brilliance of the light had blinded me.
Nyo jo apar wiye aboro meno ma yam ot ma wiye bor opoto i komgi onekogi i Ciloam, wutamo ni gin onoŋo gutimo bal makato jo mukene ducu ma bedo i Jerucalem? 	Or those eighteen who died when the tower in Siloam fell on them—do you think they were more guilty than all the others living in Jerusalem?
pe igen lee keken me jami pa woru mape in itimmo jami meeri mo 	do not hope only to inherit your father's things without doing something for yourself
camme ber mada 	the food is very nice 
ocok rac ka icammo ci twerro kelli twoo nyo nekki bene woko 	ocok is a dangerous poisonous fruit, which if you eat it, it can make you ill and may even kill you
Yecu ocako gamo doggi ma kun penyogi ni, “Moses yam ocikowu niŋniŋ?” 	“What did Moses command you?” he replied.
wek en bene kong obil gin ma luwotte gubillo 	let him also taste what his companions tasted
Dok ka wumiyo banya bot dano ma wugeno ni gitwero culowu, pwoc aŋo ma wulimo iye? Lubalo bene miyo banya bot lubalo wek giculgi marom. 	And if you lend to those from whom you expect repayment, what credit is that to you? Even sinners lend to sinners, expecting to be repaid in full.
lee madit callo dyang dok cal mada macallo dyang	an animal which is as big as a cow and in many ways similar to cows
ollowa ki temmo tukko man nono 	tiring us with this play or exercises for nothing
kadi bed iyetta, ento acammo cam meeri nyong 	even though you abused me, I ate your food for nothing 
dano tin gitye ka yakke ki jami ma pe larre 	today people are looting many things as they like
gikke me dong tic obeddo i Jun 	his stoppage at work was in June
pwonynye yabbo wang dano, telokke ni, pimeno dano niang jami mapol ci pieno miyo gitammo me tiyo jami ma anyim pigi 	learning opens people's eyes, that is, makes them understand many things and plan to do things for themselves
pien wawinyo pi niyewu i kom Kricito Yecu ki pi marwu ma wumaro kwede jo pa Lubaŋa ducu. 	We always thank God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, when we pray for you,
tye ka pido i kot pi lawotte 	he is pleading in court for his friend
Lacen i kare ma Yecu odonyo i ot pa Petero, ci oneno maro Petero obuto piny onoŋo tye ki two lyeto. 	Then Jesus said to the centurion, “Go! Let it be done just as you believed it would.” And his servant was healed at that moment.
jem woko pe iye 	rebel against it  
pe igol palaa ki yat pien liggo lakke 	don't use the knife for cutting the wood because it blunts it
Luparicayo gukato woko, cutcut gucako poro lok kacel ki jo pa Kerode kit ma myero gineke kwede. 	Then the Pharisees went out and began to plot with the Herodians how they might kill Jesus.
dano ma miyo jami en bene gibimiine 	a person who gives things he too will be given
Yecu en aye lakwat maber ma gwokko rommine 	Jesus is the good Shepherd who looks after His sheep 
tukko odilone tye nigning? 	how is the football game going on?
yenynyo buk me cura 	looking for mathematic book
Ka dok ocako pwonyogi kun loko ni, “Pe yam gicoyo ni, ‘Oda gibilwoŋo ni ot me lega pa rok ducu’? Ento wun wuloko odoko boro pa luyak.” 	And as he taught them, he said, “Is it not written: ‘My house will be called a house of prayer for all nations’? But you have made it ‘a den of robbers.’”
I kare me kwiya piny Lubaŋa yam pe oyaro pire, ento i kare man en doŋ ociko ni dano ducu myero guŋut i kom balgi, 	In the past God overlooked such ignorance, but now he commands all people everywhere to repent.
Dok i kare ma gibatijawu giyikowu kacel ki Kricito, ka lacen wucer woko kacel kwede i niyewu i kom tic pa Lubaŋa matek ma yam ocero kwede Yecu Kricito ki i kin jo muto. 	For in Christ all the fullness of the Deity lives in bodily form,
latin myero gibyel i ngee 	the child should be carried on the back 
Abur tye ki nyig me pakke ma gilwonggo ni Owila, Abur —Owila	Abur has another name of praise, Owila, Abur Owila
oyogge woko 	has become loose or has loosened
Lyeto mager twatwal owaŋo dano atika, mumiyo dano guyeto nyiŋ Lubaŋa ma tye ki twero i kom gemo magi, pe guŋut dok bene pe gumiyo deyo bote. 	They were seared by the intense heat and they cursed the name of God, who had control over these plagues, but they refused to repent and glorify him.
Pien Lubaŋa gire pe ye gin ma pe tye kakare, wiye pe biwil i kom tic ma yam wutiyo, kadi ki mar ma wunyuto pire ki konyo jo pa Lubaŋa, ma pud wutye ka konyogi bene wa i kare-ni. 	God is not unjust; he will not forget your work and the love you have shown him as you have helped his people and continue to help them.
Ka jo ma onoŋo gukwoŋo cako tic-ci gubino, gutamo ni gwok nyo gibinoŋo mabup makato	So when those came who were hired first, they expected to receive more
Cutcut pii me nam ocako twagge matek, ma yeya onoŋo doŋ cok lwiny woko i te pii	Then he got into the boat and his disciples followed him.
awula lye me yib lee mukene bene macalo jubi, ka lagwar 	there are awula made of other animals tails such as buffalo and zebra
Iwek balwa, macalo wan waweko bal pa dano ma gibalo botwa. 	Give us today our daily bread.
An Paulo amotowu ki coc ma acoyo ki ciŋa. 	I, Paul, write this greeting in my own hand.
en kwanno i Bulaya 	he studies in Europe
Catan odonyo i cwiny Juda Lakeriot ma en onoŋo dano acel i kin jo apar wiye aryo-ni. 	Then Satan entered Judas, called Iscariot, one of the Twelve.
cib i tee baraja 	place or put it on the verandah
Ci jo mogo ma gua ki i kacokke ma gilwoŋo ni kacokke pa jo ma gigonyogi ki i opii, kacel ki jo mogo me Cirene ki me Alegijanderia, ki jo ma gua Cilicia ki Acia, gubedo ka pyem ki Citefano. 	Opposition arose, however, from members of the Synagogue of the Freedmen (as it was called)—Jews of Cyrene and Alexandria as well as the provinces of Cilicia and Asia—who began to argue with Stephen.
latinne coyo maber mada 	the child or his child writes very well 
bkido ringoki muranga mutwoo i pii 	soaking dried meat and beans in water 
Wan mono doki wabiwaco aŋo? Myero wamedde ki timo bal wek kica onya? 	so that I may come to you with joy, by God’s will, and in your company be refreshed.
Kumeno apokapoka obedo i kin lwak pire. 	Does not Scripture say that the Messiah will come from David’s descendants and from Bethlehem, the town where David lived?”
Ka ce cer pa jo muto pe, ci Kricito bene kara pe gicero. 	If there is no resurrection of the dead, then not even Christ has been raised.
ladwar dong oyubbo pekine me citto ka dwar 	the hunter has already made provisions for going to hunt
yiiro wang rac 	bewitching the eyes is bad 
wii cel man twerro nyelle maber 	the head of the fence can be well trimmed
moo lenynye woko ka giketto i nget keno 	the butter will melt if it is put near the cooking place
Pien wun pe wubino i gin ma gitwero gudo kome, ki mac ma yam olyel i wi got Cinai, ki colpiny me mutu ma ocido woko licuc, ki yamo lapiru matek, 	You have not come to a mountain that can be touched and that is burning with fire; to darkness, gloom and storm;
ot gweni man twerro gogge ki kolo 	this hen's house can be fenced with papyrus mat
Ci Moses ki Elia gucako nen botgi, gubedo ka lok ki Yecu. 	After six days Jesus took with him Peter, James and John the brother of James, and led them up a high mountain by themselves.
rangi atworo obeddo callo rangi pot yadi 	the colour green is like the colour of the leaves of trees
Gudok iye ni, “Jon Labatija, jo mukene giwacci Elia, ki jo mukene ni ŋatti mo acel i kin lunebi macon aye doŋ ocer.” 	They replied, “Some say John the Baptist; others say Elijah; and still others, that one of the prophets of long ago has come back to life.”
wanynyo wang bur	to remove off the dressing on the sore or ulcer 
Lupwonnye gucako ŋiyo piny oyotoyot, ci waŋgi pe omedo ki neno dano mo, guneno kom Yecu ma tye kwedgi-ni keken. 	Suddenly, when they looked around, they no longer saw anyone with them except Jesus.
tidu pud omakko cingge ci pud peya twerero tinggo gim mo 	his hand is still numbed or still has numbness in his hand therefore he cannot yet carry anything
mon wirro komgi ki moo ma ngwecgi kuur 	the women smear their bodies with oils that have sweet smells 
Ka abedo bot Lujudaya alokke abedo macalo Lujudaya, wek anoŋ Lujudaya mogo	To the Jews I became like a Jew, to win the Jews
pe itwee tol onid gut dyel 	do not tie tightly the rope around the neck of the goat's neck 
Ento Yecu ogamo ni, “Makato gitye ki gum, jo ma giwinyo lok pa Lubaŋa, dok gigwoko!” 	He replied, “Blessed rather are those who hear the word of God and obey it.”
coo gitinggo jami wii pal gwok, mon gitinggo ki wic	men carry things on the shoulders, while women carry on the heads
Ento Lubaŋa onoŋo bal tye i komgi, pien owaco ni, “Kare biromo, man lok pa Rwot, ma abimoko iye gicikkena manyen ki jo me doggola pa Icrael, ki jo me doggola pa Juda. 	But God found fault with the people and said: “The days are coming, declares the Lord, when I will make a new covenant with the people of Israel and with the people of Judah.
Pien macalo Won tye ki kwo i iye kene, kit meno en bene omiyo Wod bedo ki kwo i iye kene, 	Moreover, the Father judges no one, but has entrusted all judgment to the Son,
kwotto cet ma ngwee 	breaking wind or passing wind or flatus which smells very bad 
odilo meno twerro baane maber mada 	the ball can easily be thrown very well 
amitto awilli moo me wiiyi 	I want to buy oil for your head
Ka Yecu oneno niyegi, ci owaco ni, “In ba, balli doŋ giweko woko.” 	When they could not find a way to do this because of the crowd, they went up on the roof and lowered him on his mat through the tiles into the middle of the crowd, right in front of Jesus.
gucitto ka lirre pien mwaka me lirre dong oo 	they went to be circumcised because it is the year for circumcision
Atito botwu ni, cakke tin, pe dok abimato pig olok, nio wa i nino maca ka abimatone doki kacel kwedwu i ker pa Wora.” 	I tell you, I will not drink from this fruit of the vine from now on until that day when I drink it new with you in my Father’s kingdom.”
nyako jubi 	heifer of buffalo
Pien en kikome yam oneno can dok Catan obite, en mumiyo en twero konyo jo ma gibitogi.	Because he himself suffered when he was tempted, he is able to help those who are being tempted.
yito tye ka tunggo dano 	the smoke is suffocating the people
dano ne marro palle mada 	the man likes very much to be elusive
Adula pe maarro dek akita	Adula does not like sauce made without simsim sauce mixed in it
gii wiye maber ka tye iye nyugi 	examine the head carefully to find out if there are lice in the hair
pi meno myero ijukgi ki tek, wek gucak bedo ki niye me ada, 	This saying is true
cik litino pe gubed katukko i bar odilo 	order the children not to play in the football field
amitto la pac mo opaa ira kitanda maber 	I want a carpenter to make for me a good bed
Wora aye keto deyo i koma, en ma wun wuwaco ni Lubaŋawu-ni. 	Jesus replied, “If I glorify myself, my glory means nothing
Amiyo nyiŋi oŋene botgi, dok abimiyo ŋene, wek mar ma imara kwede obed i gin, ki an i igi.”	“Father, I want those you have given me to be with me where I am, and to see my glory, the glory you have given me because you loved me before the creation of the world.
ka imitto citto ka dwarro lyec, nong oken mo en aye oteerri 	if you want to hunt elephants, find a professional hunter to take you
gitye ka toto kic ojang ki i kor yat caa 	the children are gathering honey (ojang) from that tree
ocitto ka limmo tyer me pikipiki me mot ma gimiine pi ticce maber 	he went to receive a gift of a motor cycle that was presented to him for his very good work
dano adii mamitte me purro poto man?	how many people are needed to cultivate this field?
obeddo ka goyo odilo ci ool twatwal 	he was playing football and got very tired
dok bene iŋeyo gin ma en mito, dok ipwoyo gin maber makato, pien doŋ gipwonyi woko ki cik. 	Now you, if you call yourself a Jew; if you rely on the law and boast in God;
litino gitye ka tukko tuko me wirre 	the children are playing spinning round game
Ento myero ikwer coyo mon ma pud gitino ma coggi oto	and is well known for her good deeds, such as bringing up children, showing hospitality, washing the feet of the Lord’s people, helping those in trouble and devoting herself to all kinds of good deeds.
adwek nyette anyetta ka giwotto pien bwomgi pud peke	adwek move about by jumping because they have no wings
lateddo tim me dwar 	one who makes successful and peaceful hunting
ka lyerre maber pe kany ma watwero lyerre iye 	there is no good swinging place here where we can swing 
En aye mumiyo lwak ocito ka jole, pien guwinyo ni en otiyo lanyut man. 	Now the crowd that was with him when he called Lazarus from the tomb and raised him from the dead continued to spread the word.
Yecu obedo ka pwony i ot pa Lubaŋa nino ducu. 	Every day he was teaching at the temple
nyeerre matek wek owiny 	laugh heartily at him to make him hear 
Mumiyo ka cware pud kwo, ce dako-nu oa okobo woko bot laco mukene, gibilwoŋe ni latim abor. Ento ka cware doŋ oto, en noŋo ogonnye woko i cik meno	For example, by law a married woman is bound to her husband as long as he is alive, but if her husband dies, she is released from the law that binds her to him.
Dok ooro lutic mukene, kun waco botgi ni, “Wuwac bot jo ma onoŋo gilwoŋogi ni, Nen, doŋ ayubo cam ducu tye, twonina ki rocina ma moo doŋ ginekogi woko, doŋ giyubo jami ducu tye	He sent his servants to those who had been invited to the banquet to tell them to come, but they refused to come.
En ce? olarowa ki i loc me piny macol ci okobowa woko i te loc pa Wode ma emaro. 	and giving joyful thanks to the Father, who has qualified you to share in the inheritance of his holy people in the kingdom of light.
dogge gwee twatwal 	his mouth smells very badly 
Pi meno, wun luwota ma amaro, wubol woro jogi woko matwal. 	Therefore, my dear friends, flee from idolatry.
Akot pe tweero wot pien tye ki akwota madit mada i emme	Akot cannot walk because she has a big swelling on her thigh
Giŋolle kop me to, kadi pe gunoŋo bal mo i kome, ka dok gulego Pilato wek oye gineke. 	Though they found no proper ground for a death sentence, they asked Pilate to have him executed.
ngadi dong tyenne ogol woko 	so and so's leg is now 
otigu pwot 	okra or lady fingers is viscous and slimy
cekko me kongo kal terro nine aryo 	fermenting of millet beer takes two days 
Adada awacciwu ni, ŋat ma ye an tye ki kwo ma pe tum. 	No one has seen the Father except the one who is from God; only he has seen the Father.
Ento lacen ka doŋ acer woko abitelo nyimwu me cito i Galilaya.” 	But after I have risen, I will go ahead of you into Galilee.”
Ŋat ma pe tuŋ bota, meno noŋo en lakworra, dok ŋat ma pe nywako coko kweda, keto mere aketa. 	“Whoever is not with me is against me, and whoever does not gather with me scatters.
Pe watye ki twero me noŋo cam ki mat ma iwa mito? 	Don’t we have the right to food and drink?
dano ma komme wac beddo lacan nakanaka 	a lazy peson will always remain poor
ka inywarra ci awerri woko 	if you abuse me I will compose a song about you
Doŋ wuŋol kop i kom dano ma kite atir, en gire pe geŋowu. 	You have condemned and murdered the innocent one, who was not opposing you.
gicubbu twon jubi matek mada ci opotto ni ja gaka kwica 	the very big buffalo was speared many times and fell down there helplessly
Doŋ kadi bed onoŋo an nyo gin jo-nu, lok ma wan doŋ watito en ennu, lok ma wun wuye bene-ni en ennu. 	Whether, then, it is I or they, this is what we preach, and this is what you believed.
En bene otemo pyedo wa ot pa Lubaŋa maditte, ci wamake woko. [Onoŋo wamito ŋolo kop i kome kun walubo cikwa-ni, 	and even tried to desecrate the temple; so we seized him, and we would have judged him in accordance with our law.
tung pa Okema gi tye kwene?  	where is Okema's home?
Cimon Petero owacce ni, “Rwot, pe doŋ tyena keken, ento ciŋa ki wiya bene.” 	“No,” said Peter, “you shall never wash my feet.” Jesus answered, “Unless I wash you, you have no part with me.”
alunya oyo lakwong	that which follows is greater or more painful than the first
Macalo jo mapol ginyatte pi gin me lobo i kit me dano, an bene abinyatte.) 	But if you do, then tolerate me just as you would a fool, so that I may do a little boasting.
latin ne kitte rac mada maarro kac twatwal ka tye kalweny ki ngati mo 	the child is very bad because she likes very much to bite the opponent when fighting
Pe abiette ka loko lok mo mukene, ento kono pi gin ma Kricito otiyo pi kelo lurok i te locce keken, kun tiyo kacel kweda i lok ki i tic, 	Therefore I glory in Christ Jesus in my service to God.
Kit meno ka ce Daudi yam olwoŋe ni Rwot, ci dok en bedo lakwarre niŋniŋ?” 	David calls him ‘Lord.’ How then can he be his son?”
puyo wii dano 	ruling over the people in other words, become the chief
wotto ma tanynyo korre atanynya 	pushing his chest forward, in a boastful manner while walking 
Apwoyo Lubaŋa pien an adumo leb mapatpat ma akatowu ducu, 	I thank God that I speak in tongues more than all of you.
owed boo i kel 	pluck the cowpeas' leaves and bring them
pi gang ma tye aperu ma eel peke iye omiyo gwokka wotto ataa 	because there is no fence around the home and it is wide open makes my dog wander about
ka i oo i akarakara yoo ci tub yoo ma ogonne odok tung lacam 	when you reach at the fork of the road follow the road that turns to the left
wun jo ma gimiyowu cik pa Lubaŋa ma lumalaika yam gukelo, ci pe wulubo.” 	you who have received the law that was given through angels but have not obeyed it.”
latin myerro gilwokko ki pii ma mor-mor pe malyet twatwal 	a child should be washed in lukewarm water not very hot 
Ento man me miyo wek wuŋe ni, Wod pa dano tye ki twero i lobo man me weko bal”, ci owaco bot latwo ni, “A, kwany kabutoni idok paco.” 	Which is easier: to say, ‘Your sins are forgiven,’ or to say, ‘Get up and walk’?
pig tyang geya bene mit litino en aye gimaarro nyammone pi mitteni, pe gitiyo iye cukari 	juice of sorghum stems is also sweet but only the children chew and suck the stems for their sweetness, sugar is not made from their juices
pal latinne pien tye ka dangge twatwal	slap the child because he is shouting too much
aduku adwogo man gicweyo maber mada	this large basket has been very well weaved 
en laco ma yomo cwinya, ma bitiyo gin ma amito ducu.’ 	God testified concerning him: ‘I have found David son of Jesse, a man after my own heart; he will do everything I want him to do.’
pot i pii wek ikwang	fall into water so as to swim
orya dong wacittu ka myel 	let us go to dance now 
ento wan watito mere lok pa Lubaŋa keken, watito i Kricito ma cwinywa leŋ i nyim Lubaŋa, macalo jo ma Lubaŋa ooro.	Unlike so many, we do not peddle the word of God for profit
aleggi Lubaga ni itimma kica 	I pray to you God to forgive me 
bongone ber mada me acomma	the cloth is very good for the loin wearing
twar dyegi ki i poto woko 	drive away the goats from the field 
royo tol ma gituddo i gutte 	inserting his head into a noose of rope
Pe wubal cwiny Lujudaya, kadi jo Grik, nyo jo muye Lubaŋa, 	Do not cause anyone to stumble, whether Jews, Greeks or the church of God—
Pien ka dano mo tamo ki i cwinye kene ni en e gin mo, kun i adane noŋo en pe gin mo, noŋo en bwolle abwola kene. 	Carry each other’s burdens, and in this way you will fulfill the law of Christ.
teggo wii dano woko i komme 	diverting away the people from him 
Ka an aryemo cen pi twero pa Beeljebul, ci litinowu kono giryemo cen pi twero pa aŋa? Pi meno gin aye gibibedo luŋolkopwu. 	How then can his kingdom stand?
gwokke koni i twomme ki la tin ma riggo kape iwotto inenno nyimmi 	be careful if you do not look out while walking you will be knocked by a running child
An pe abino ka lwoŋo jo ma kitgi atir, ento lubalo, wek guŋuti.” 	But the Pharisees and the teachers of the law who belonged to their sect complained to his disciples, “Why do you eat and drink with tax collectors and sinners?”
ci owoto, otoŋo ki opii pa ajwaka madit, oŋuno ite malacuc. Nyiŋ opii meno Maliko. 	Then Simon Peter, who had a sword, drew it and struck the high priest’s servant, cutting off his right ear
Gin gulegowa ma gibako doggi ni watim ber, waye gin giribbe kwedwa i konyo jo pa Lubaŋa. 	In the midst of a very severe trial, their overflowing joy and their extreme poverty welled up in rich generosity.
gimakke ka cot 	he was caught having illicit intercourse
Acwalo en botwu pi lok man kikome, wek en omi wuŋe kit ma wan watye kwede, dok ocuk cwinywu. 	Tychicus, the dear brother and faithful servant in the Lord, will tell you everything, so that you also may know how I am and what I am doing.
Luka ma en daktar ma wamaro, kacel ki Dema bene gumotowu. 	I vouch for him that he is working hard for you and for those at Laodicea and Hierapolis.
Cutcut Cwiny Maleŋ oyuto tamma woko, ci aneno komker ma gicibo i polo, ma dano mo onoŋo obedo i wiye. 	At once I was in the Spirit, and there before me was a throne in heaven with someone sitting on it.
pe ikel matata kany  	don't bring trouble here
dyewor obeddo muttu 	there was no moonlight and so it was dark
caraan pa jo Japan gibecco mada 	the Japanese sewing machines are very good
Jo ducu ma guket ata guwoto kun gitito lok me kwena maber. 	Those who had been scattered preached the word wherever they went.
okoc jubi ger mada 	an old and isolated buffalo is very fierce 
Owaco botgi ni, “Pe wujog makato wel ma gicikowu.” 	“Don’t collect any more than you are required to,” he told them.
kella adita wek acit kwedde ka jubbo nyim	bring me the small basket so that I may go with it to collect the simsim
Ka gitye ka wot i yo, dano mo owacce ni, Abilubi ka ma ibicito iye ducu. 	As they were walking along the road, a man said to him, “I will follow you wherever you go.”
giribu pii ma ikul	they share only water from the well
Ka jo-nu gubino bot Yecu, guwacce, ni, “Jon oorowa boti, kun penyo ni, ‘In aye i ŋat ma myero obin-ni, nyo dok wakur ŋat mukene?’ ” 	When the men came to Jesus, they said, “John the Baptist sent us to you to ask, ‘Are you the one who is to come, or should we expect someone else?’”
litino cukul gitye ka pwonynyo kutto lure	the school children are learning how to play lure
rec bolle ni twaca twaca ka tye woko i wii teera 	fish twists or turns about when out of the water
pirra nino ducu kello pekko ki lapiira	plotting always brings trouble on the plotter
gung ic pe konynyo i kom lok ma gititti atir 	it does not help to be suspicious of what you have been told straight away 
yuk tee yat ma gipitoni wek pii odony iye 	dig up round the planted tree to make the water sink underneath
lateddo tye kwene? 	where is the cook?
nyeb litino ki tukko odillo ci gibimaarro tukko odilo	interest the children with football and in future they will love playing football  
myero bene gubed jo ma niaŋ maber i muŋ me niyewa, kun cwinygi bene leŋ. 	He must also have a good reputation with outsiders, so that he will not fall into disgrace and into the devil’s trap.
Petero ocako kwoŋŋe kun lamme kekene ni, “Pe aŋeyo danoni.” Cutcut twon gweno otugi kok. 	Then he began to call down curses, and he swore to them, “I don’t know the man!” Immediately a rooster crowed.
Gucato lonyogi ki jamigi, ka gupoko ki jo ducu kit macalo mitte bot ŋat acel acel. 	They sold property and possessions to give to anyone who had need.
mupira leela man twerro pikke 	the tube of this bicycle can be inflated 
mon byello litinogi i ingeegi ki obeno ka gitye ka tic 	women carry their babies on their backs or stomach with obeno
yuu odilo botta 	throw the ball to me
Ci ŋat acel ki i kin ludoŋo oloko kweda, kun penya ni, “Jo magi ma guruko jor matar-ri aŋagi, gua kono ki kwene?” 	Then one of the elders asked me, “These in white robes—who are they, and where did they come from?”
kaa tyang ka wek iwiny mitte 	bite the sugarcane in order to taste its sweetness
Pien Wod pa dano obino ka yenyo ki ka laro jo ma orwenyo.” 	For the Son of Man came to seek and to save the lost.”
en lanyatte mada 	he is a proud fellow
Yecu owacce ni, “Cit ilwoŋ cwari, ci idwog kany.” 	The woman said to him, “Sir, give me this water so that I won’t get thirsty and have to keep coming here to draw water.”
Pi man omiyo Pilato okato woko botgi, openyogi ni, “Wudoto dano man pi kop aŋo?” 	One of the high priest’s servants, a relative of the man whose ear Peter had cut off, challenged him, “Didn’t I see you with him in the garden?”
ka onenno dano ci manne ki ot ci rweny woko 	when he has seen the people he goes round the house and disappears 
lacoo mene ma oyetti? 	which man abused you? 
Wonne Jekaria opoŋ ki Cwiny Maleŋ, oloko macalo lanebi ni, 	His father Zechariah was filled with the Holy Spirit and prophesied:
tammo pi gin ma etimmo	reflecting on what he did 
larem lanyom ma cuŋ i ŋete kun winye, cwinye bedo yom twatwal pi winyo dwan lanyom	The bride belongs to the bridegroom
dano ma woor 	a greedy person 
Gucito kengi ki yeya i kabedo ma dano pe iye. 	So they went away by themselves in a boat to a solitary place.
“Ka dano mo miyo ŋat mo acel ma i kin jo magi matino ma guye an-ni gupoto i bal, ci bedo ber makato ducu ka gitweyo kidi rego madit i ŋute ci gibole kwede wa i nam. 	“If anyone causes one of these little ones—those who believe in me—to stumble, it would be better for them if a large millstone were hung around their neck and they were thrown into the sea.
tunggo latin ki cam 	stuffing the child with food
muni maaro tuko adong mada	the Europeans love boxing game very much
wek awerri wer acel mamit iwiny 	let me sing one nice song for you to listen to  
getto pa canduk i doggola 	sticking of the box in the door way
okwanyo gibutone, ocito gire. Onoŋo ninone ceŋ cabit, 	At once the man was cured; he picked up his mat and walked
bongone obeddo atworo 	the cloth was green
Pe wuwek bal olo komwu ma to-ni, wek pe gumi wubed ka lubo mitigi. 	In the same way, count yourselves dead to sin but alive to God in Christ Jesus.
acany ma i tyenne ni dong orii mada	the chronic ulcer on his foot has taken very long time
lee ma gicubbo caa pud tye kakwitte, cud woko 	the speared animal is still kicking, spear it again to put it to death
pii malyet en aye ber me lwok	hot water is good for washing
iwila ki lak lyec	did you buy me with elephant tusks?
Ento myero wuŋe man, ni, ka ce nene won ot oŋeyo cawa mene i dyewor ma lakwo onoŋo obebino kwede, kono obedo ka kiyo piny, kono pe oweko gituro ode. 	But understand this: If the owner of the house had known at what time of night the thief was coming, he would have kept watch and would not have let his house be broken into.
Medo i kom meno bene, Lubaŋa yam okwoŋo kwoŋ i kome. Jo mukene ca gudoko ajwagi laboŋo kwoŋ mo, 	And it was not without an oath! Others became priests without any oath,
An abatijawu ki pii, ento en bibatijawu ki Cwiny Maleŋ 	I baptize you with water, but he will baptize you with the Holy Spirit.”
lacen dano-nu bibedo marac makato kit ma onoŋo yam obedo kwede con.” 	And the final condition of that person is worse than the first.”
Pien in Larok irom ki jaŋ yat jeituni me tim ma gitoŋo woko, gicomo i kom jeituni maberre, ma yam onoŋo pe olot i kom yat jeituni ma gipito apita. Pe bedo yot twatwal bot Lubaŋa me dwoko jaŋ yat mukene ca i kom yat kikome ma yam giturogi ki iye-ni? 	For if God did not spare the natural branches, he will not spare you either.
ŋat madit i kinwu myero odok macalo ŋat matidi, ki latel-wic myero obed macalo ŋat ma tiyo pi dano. 	Instead, the greatest among you should be like the youngest, and the one who rules like the one who serves.
noŋo en okette malo kene ki wakke, ento pe ŋeyo gin mo kadi ki acel. Iye opoŋ ki par maraco me pyem ki daa i kom nyiŋ lok mogo	If anyone teaches otherwise and does not agree to the sound instruction of our Lord Jesus Christ and to godly teaching,
laworo lagoga omiyo nyerro mada ki dano 	yesterday the clown or comedian caused a lot of laughter to the people
nio ka abimiyo lukworri doko kom laten tyeni.’ 	until I make your enemies a footstool for your feet.”’
tye joo mukene ma ticgi me, lyeddo keken magitye ki nying bene me lyeddo 	there are people whose work is shaving the hair and they have a name (called barbers
pien doŋ wutyeko bilo ber pa Rwot. 	Therefore, rid yourselves of all malice and all deceit, hypocrisy, envy, and slander of every kind.
Dano ma mwolle woko kekene calo latin man, en aye ma loyo ki dit i ker me polo. 	Therefore, whoever takes the lowly position of this child is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven.
gwok aye dok ka nango ngokke	it is a dog that returns to lick its vomit
Pe dok alwoŋowu lutic, pien latic pe ŋeyo gin ma laditte tiyo	You are my friends if you do what I command.
pimmo remo me nenno ka kwidi me maleriya tye iye 	examining the blood to find out if there are malaria parasites in it
anyoo kello nimoniya ci nekko litino oyot oyot mada ka pe gimiyo yat matek oyot oyot 	measles causes pneumonia, which kills the children very quickly if strong medicine is not given immediately
aol kweddi pe dong amitto nenni 	I am tired of you, I do not want to see you
cut jal wii lum ajalla matye i dye kal 	cut the top of the grass which is in the compound
En mumiyo nino ducu wadiyo cwinywa maber, kun bene waŋeyo ni, ka watye i paco me komwa en-ni, wabedo bor ki Rwot, 	Now the one who has fashioned us for this very purpose is God, who has given us the Spirit as a deposit, guaranteeing what is to come.
ka gipenynye pi gin ma otimme ci en odok iye ni yaani gin kono gin agaagi ma gipenynye ni? 	when he was asked about what happened, he answered them, by asking who were they to ask him, in a sarcastic way? 
kun giwacci, ‘Jo magi ma gubino lacen-ni gutiyo tic pi cawa acel keken, ento in imiyo gubedo rom kwedwa kun wacanne i tic i ceŋ malyet dyeceŋ jwi.’ 	‘These who were hired last worked only one hour,’ they said, ‘and you have made them equal to us who have borne the burden of the work and the heat of the day.’
otigo cam ma dano maarro mada pien yubbo is dok geggo is tweene 	lady fingers are vegetables which are loved very much because they soften the stomach and prevent constipation
Ka guwoto gukato ki i Picidia, ci gubino wa i lobo Pampulia. 	After going through Pisidia, they came into Pamphylia,
ngat ma lagala cammo boo ki toyo	one who is always despising others, eats cowpeas with dew
dwee menynyo piny maleng mada  	the moon lights the ground very well
ka imitti gudaa ci rut lok i kingi	if you want them to quarrel, incite them
danone dong opac woko pe parro ngati mo 	the man does not care about anybody, he is disobedient
nen ngeyi ka mutoka moo pee ka dong igak idok tung lacam ka wek pee wuyokke ki mutoka mukene 	look behind to see if no another car is coming and then turn left in order to avoid collision with another car
ogullo manok lokke botwa 	he told us secret of the case 
Doŋ tuŋ lee apar ma ineno ca gin aye luker apar ma peya gulimo twero me loc, ento myero gulim twero me loc macalo luker pi cawa acel, kacel ki lee ca bene. 	“The ten horns you saw are ten kings who have not yet received a kingdom, but who for one hour will receive authority as kings along with the beast.
Pi meno, ka cam aye miyo omera poto i bal, pe doŋ abicamo riŋo matwal, wek pe ami omera opot i bal.	Therefore, if what I eat causes my brother or sister to fall into sin, I will never eat meat again, so that I will not cause them to fall.
En obedo ka laro lok i kacokke i nino me cabit ducu, kun temo loyo tam pa Lujudaya ki jo Grik. 	Every Sabbath he reasoned in the synagogue, trying to persuade Jews and Greeks.
paco dong oballe woko 	there is no peace except trouble at home now
bye me gwen aribu tye ki ococ mapol ento gwen angoro pe ki occce 	the termites aribu has an anthill which has many holes round it but an anthill ot angoro termites has none,
man jami pa agaa? 	whose things are these? 
Pien pe tye gin mo ma okanne ma pe biŋene, kadi gin ma giumo ma pe binen kamaleŋ. 	For whatever is hidden is meant to be disclosed, and whatever is concealed is meant to be brought out into the open.
nek gin marac mada 	killing is a very bad thing 
Wod pa dano bioro lumalaikane, gibicoko ki i te kerre gin ducu ma miyo dano gipoto i bal, kacel ki jo ducu ma gin lutim maraco, 	The Son of Man will send out his angels, and they will weed out of his kingdom everything that causes sin and all who do evil.
lyerro dano pi bal ma gutimmo marac	hanging people for serious crime that they committed 
ot cukul kama gikwanno iye ni dok dit twatwal pe twerro menynye ki mac tara keken 	the school hall where the students study is too big, it cannot be illuminated by kerosene lamp only 
guumme ki bataniya ma giwillo laworo ni 	they covered themselves with the blanket they bought yesterday
ocikko ni ebimiinigi mot 	he promised that he would give them gifts 
latinne pe nngeyo ngwec ki cing 	the child does not know scooping food with fingers
Askari pa laloc gutero Yecu i Praitorion, ci gucoko buca monygi ducu i nyime. 	But he had Jesus flogged, and handed him over to be crucified.
Gukatti woko ki i lyelgi i kare ma Yecu doŋ ocer, gucito i Jerucalem gunyutte bot jo mapol. 	The earth shook, the rocks split
cweyo kello twoo kor 	fatness brings heart disease
nyayo lok pe ber 	to make the matter worse is not good
ocitto I ot yat ka mukko lakke woko ma otop  	he went to the hospital to have his decayed tooth uprooted
dok wuket cwinywu ka bedo mot. Dano acel acel opar pi ticce kun tiyo ki ciŋe kit macalo wacikowu kwede, 	and to make it your ambition to lead a quiet life: You should mind your own business and work with your hands, just as we told you,
pi meno gin ma awaco, awaco macalo Won oloko bota.”	I know that his command leads to eternal life
an bene amiyo mera kumeno, in bene iŋeyo ni caden ma amiyo obedo ada. 	Demetrius is well spoken of by everyone—and even by the truth itself
oyoo gupong kacammo gido giddo mungati ma oo piny 	the rats have gathered to eat crumbs of bread which dropped down
Yecu ogamo doggi ni, “An koŋ apenyowu ki peny mo acel	Jesus replied, “I will ask you one question
cunggo dano twatwal i dong tic 	he forces people very much to work hard
gupako Lubaŋa pa jo Icrael matek. 	The people were amazed when they saw the mute speaking, the crippled made well, the lame walking and the blind seeing
titto lokke nianggo dano mada 	his preaching makes people understand well
dano mukene gimaarro matte cak lukulo mada 	some people like very much to drink coagulated milk
roc tamme woko  	confuse him
coo lok ducu ma tin gititto 	write down all the words that have been preached
Tyen mapol aketo can i komgi i kacokke ducu, kun atemo miyogi yeto nyiŋ Kricito	Many a time I went from one synagogue to another to have them punished, and I tried to force them to blaspheme
ento gubedo ka laro lok kwede ma dok i kom dinigi, ki i kom ŋat mo ma nyiŋe Yecu ma yam oto, ma Paulo waco ni tye makwo. 	Instead, they had some points of dispute with him about their own religion and about a dead man named Jesus who Paul claimed was alive.
kun giwaco ni, “Piŋo nene icito bot jo ma pe gilirogi ci icamo kwedgi?” 	and said, “You went into the house of uncircumcised men and ate with them.”
Yecu owaco bot Juda ni, “Larema, ibino kany piŋo?” Ci gubino gutugi poto i kome, gumake woko cut. 	Jesus replied, “Do what you came for, friend.” Then the men stepped forward, seized Jesus and arrested him.
litino myero gitiyo gin ma illo wii paco 	children should do something that raises the name of the family 
Onoŋo mono yam gikwano i kome niŋniŋ? Onoŋo gikwane ma pud pe gilire, nyo lacen ma onoŋo doŋ gityeko lire woko? Pe ma doŋ gityeko lire, ento ma pud peya gilire. 	Is this blessedness only for the circumcised, or also for the uncircumcised? We have been saying that Abraham’s faith was credited to him as righteousness.
pien in dok ikelo lok ma welo twatwal i itwa, ci wamito niaŋ tere.” 	You are bringing some strange ideas to our ears, and we would like to know what they mean.”
litino gitye ka myel i dye bar 	the children are dancing in the field 
Ento coc ma yam gicoyo otweyo dano ducu macalo lumabuc i te twero me bal, wek cikke ma nene giciko pi ye Yecu Kricito gimi bot jo muye en. 	Is the law, therefore, opposed to the promises of God? Absolutely not! For if a law had been given that could impart life, then righteousness would certainly have come by the law.
Ka Catan doŋ otyeko bite, ci oweke kun kuro kare maber. 	When the devil had finished all this tempting, he left him until an opportune time.
pien lok ma gicoyo i koma tye ka cobbe kakare.” 	Yes, what is written about me is reaching its fulfillment.”
anyogine twerro regge 	the maize can be ground
Dok mot me nono pe rom ki bal pa dano acel ca, pien pi bal pa ŋat acel ca omiyo giŋolo kop oloyo dano ducu, ento tic me kica ma olubo bal mapol okelo loyo kop. 	For if the many died by the trespass of the one man, how much more did God’s grace and the gift that came by the grace of the one man, Jesus Christ, overflow to the many!
Ento ginacoya kono wacci ŋo? Wacci, “Ryem aŋeca-ni woko gin ki wode, pien wod pa aŋeca pe bileyo jami kacel gin ki wod pa dako kikome.” 	Now you, brothers and sisters, like Isaac, are children of promise.
gwok okaye ni gwak 	the dog snapped at him
litino gi aye ma gimaarro gwello cet i kabeddo atata  	children are the ones who do pass large stools in various places
Ento myero wuŋe man ni, Kono nene won ot ŋeyo cawa ma lakwo bibino iye kono okiyo ma pe oweko dano oturo ode. 	But understand this: If the owner of the house had known at what hour the thief was coming, he would not have let his house be broken into.
dano ma jugge atata ballo tic woko ki jo mukene	a person who always moves about doing nothing spoils work for the others
yoo tye ma twolo 	the way is open
Lacen ka cawa okato kine ka adek, ci dakone obino odonyo, kun pe ŋeyo gin mutimme-ni. 	About three hours later his wife came in, not knowing what had happened.
Ento Pilato odok iye ni, “Gin ma acoyo, doŋ acoyo.” 	The chief priests of the Jews protested to Pilate, “Do not write ‘The King of the Jews,’ but that this man claimed to be king of the Jews.”
Dok oturu ki nen bot Yakobo, lacenne onen bot lukwena ducu. 	Then he appeared to James, then to all the apostles,
Wun kikomwu onoŋo wubedo cadenna ni yam atito ni, ‘An pe a Kricito ma Lubaŋa oyero ento giora akwoŋo nyime’. 	To this John replied, “A person can receive only what is given them from heaven.
lok ducu maraccu ma en lokko i komma acayo acaya	all the bad things that he speaks about me, I just ignored them
Magi aye gubedo kwaro Yecu Kricito, Lakwar Daudi, lakwar Abraim. 	This is the genealogy of Jesus the Messiah the son of David, the son of Abraham:
En odok iye botgi ni, “Wutamo ni Lugalilaya meno gin lubalo makato Lugalilaya mukene ducu, ma omiyo guneno can kit meno-ni? 	Jesus answered, “Do you think that these Galileans were worse sinners than all the other Galileans because they suffered this way?
citto pa jooni i Buggereja oran ki yoo, lim odokko nok 	the going of those people to England stopped half way because the money was not enough
Pe tye ŋat mo ma oette me ribbe kwedgi, ento onoŋo dano guketo deyo madit i komgi. 	No one else dared join them, even though they were highly regarded by the people.
An Tertio aye ma acoyo waraga man amotowu i Rwot. 	By smooth talk and flattery they deceive the minds of naive people.
Ka piny oyuto, lupwonnyene gucito i dog nam, 	Jesus, knowing that they intended to come and make him king by force, withdrew again to a mountain by himself.
gutudde kacel komme 	they united together against him
ringo ka giketto i canduk gicco ci jig maber mada 	when meat is kept in a refrigerator it becomes very hard 
en donge bit, cello bap maber mada 	he is a sharp shooter, he shoots the target very well
Ka kono nene wan kikomwa waŋolo kop i komwa kekenwa ki ada, kono pe giŋolo kop i komwa. 	But if we were more discerning with regard to ourselves, we would not come under such judgment.
wakko dano ka dwar, myel, pur, ki mon ka kac	to invite people to come for hunting, dancing, cultivation and women for harvesting
caane keni ni pe irommo tic monni pe konynyo, in irommo 	to despise yourself that you are not fit for the job is of no use, you are fit for the job 
Awobi mo odwalo cuka boŋo camanini keken i kome, ci olubo ki kor Yecu	A young man, wearing nothing but a linen garment, was following Jesus
wuyub kabedo kunnu.” 	Make preparations there.”
latin myerro gilwokko ki pii ma mor-mor pe malyet twatwal 	a child should be bathed in lukewarm water not very hot 
doŋ jo ma onoŋo gutayo lee ca ki calle, ki namba me nyiŋe, onoŋo gucuŋ i dog nam me kiyo, kun gumako naŋa pa Lubaŋa i ciŋgi. 	They held harps given them by God
Ento dano ma pe tiyo, ma ye Ŋat ma kwano jo ma pe lworo Lubaŋa ni kitgi atir, kit dano macalo meno gikwano ni kite atir pi niyene. 	Now to the one who works, wages are not credited as a gift but as an obligation.
dudde ogullo 	her buttocks have Protruded
orukkootiko macak i gutte 	she wore blue beads around her neck 
moor wanggi i komme 	watch him carefully
giterro bet woko ka woyone 	the millet was taken out to partially dry
ento Yecu odoko ajwaka pi kwoŋ pa Lubaŋa ma yam owacce ni, “Rwot doŋ okwoŋo kwoŋ, pe dok biloko tamme, ‘In ibedo ajwaka nakanaka.’” 	but he became a priest with an oath when God said to him: “The Lord has sworn and will not change his mind: ‘You are a priest forever.’”
ludito gimaarro cammo larum lee pien ringone yom 	the elders like very much to eat the back part of the chest because its meat is soft
pii odwon woko tki dong atida 	the water has almost dried up, get a little by little
Wan watye ki kit cwiny acel-lu me niye ma yam omiyo gicoyo ni, “Aye, en mumiyo aloko.” Wan bene waye, mumiyo watye ka lok. 	So then, death is at work in us, but life is at work in you.
nyut yoo ki dano caa 	show the way to the people there
Gin aŋo ma kelo mony, ki gin aŋo ma kelo lweny i kinwu? Pe par ma wutye kwede aye tye ka lweny i dul komwu? 	What causes fights and quarrels among you? Don’t they come from your desires that battle within you?
panggo wii latin woko ki i kom dini	to divert the child away from religion 
moyo bong one i ceng ka twoo ki otyenno 	to put putting his clothes in the sun to dry in the afternoon
motoka opotto i kulu ma opong ki daba ci dano gukati woko ki i kulu ma bogigi ducu opong ki daba ma beddi joto joto 	the car fell into the muddy river and people came out of the river with their clothes completely covered with mud
rweny pa dyangge 	loss of his cow or his cow went astray 
tye ka ceerro lee wek gukatti woko ki i tee lum  	close or shut the door 
ngiine me oddi tin tye i gang lai pa lupolici 	housing inspection, is in the police line today
gidonggo matek ci opotto piny i tuko me dongge ci ma oa malo dong wotto ni tabu tabu, pe twerro wot maber 	he was floored during the game of boxing and when he got up he could hardly walk
En owoto i lobo ducu ma cokcok ki Judaya kun tito lok me kwenane ni, “Wuŋut, wek gibatijawu, ci Lubaŋa biweko balwu,” 	He went into all the country around the Jordan, preaching a baptism of repentance for the forgiveness of sins.
gucitto i lukiko pi pido me dayangigi ma gikwallo 	they went to the court for a case of theft of their cattle 
Pien pe tye te guti mo mukene ma gitwero ketone, kono maca ma doŋ tye-ni keken, en aye Yecu Kricito. 	For no one can lay any foundation other than the one already laid, which is Jesus Christ.
geerro dwan dano 	cause swelling of the throat 
dano ma lagoba kiteno twerro bollowu i pekko ka wuwinynyo lokke 	Olanya is a great liar do not listen to him 
litino guo woko ni pep mape ononggo purl wayubbe me jollogi 	the children arrived suddenly before we were ready to receive them 
yito tinny ni luu 	smoke rises up densely and slowly
Pien moo man kono nene gicato woko, kono nene okelo lim ma romo ciliŋ miya adek kulu ki makato bene, ka wek gimi ki lucan.” Ci gucako tugge i kom dako-nu matek. 	It could have been sold for more than a year’s wages and the money given to the poor.” And they rebuked her harshly.
gitye ka obbo mac me aoya pien piny bic mada 	the boys are making fire for warming (people sitting around it) because it is too cold 
rutto it 	to pierce the ear
teer latin paco 	take the child home
Ki tuŋ bota man lok matidi mo twatwal ka wuŋolo kop i koma, kadi lukiko mo pa dano bene. An kikoma bene pe aŋolo kop i koma kena. 	I care very little if I am judged by you or by any human court; indeed, I do not even judge myself.
Yecu omedde ki wotte i kin gaŋi madito ki matino, kun pwonyo, dok kwede tuŋ Jerucalem. 	Then Jesus went through the towns and villages, teaching as he made his way to Jerusalem.
gituuro makke ni kwic 	he was seized suddenly or he was suddenly seized 
Iyo, omera, amito kony mo ki boti i Rwotwa. Kwe cwinya i Kricito. 	If he has done you any wrong or owes you anything, charge it to me.
caarro me gwokko ot 	carelessness of looking after the house 
kit onone pe ono me nino ducu nen callo aona opiyo 	his type of coughing is not like the usual ones but it is like tuberculosis 
Onoŋo guwinyo lok i koma keken ma gitittigi ni, “ŋat ma yam obedo ka yelowa-ni, kombeddi tye ka tito lok i kom niye man ma yam koŋ otemo tyekone wokoni.” 	I was personally unknown to the churches of Judea that are in Christ.
Lubaŋa yam owaco ki lamalaika mo ni, “Bed i ŋeta tuŋ acuc i kabedo me deyo, nio ka abimiyo lukworri gidoko kom laten tyeni?” 	To which of the angels did God ever say, “Sit at my right hand until I make your enemies a footstool for your feet”?
dwee menynyo piny maleng mada 	the moon lights the space very well
kadi beddi pe okatto peny, olo ducu oyommo cwinynye me temmone 	even though, or inspite of the fact that, he did not pass the examination, he was all the same happy for trying it
Lok man lok ada, myero dako ducu guye. 	Have nothing to do with godless myths and old wives’ tales; rather, train yourself to be godly.
opotto piny ki i wii dudde ci oturro otit dudde woko 	he fell down on his buttocks and broke his coccyx
gucitto ka doyo doo 	they went together to weed
odok ma omokko i kom meja ni twerro gwedde 	the glue which is stuck on the table can be removed
Abako doga bot lupwonnyeni ni guryem woko, ento ryemone oloyogi.” 	I begged your disciples to drive it out, but they could not.”
Otiŋo waŋe bot lupwonnyene, owaco botgi ni, “Wutye ki gum, pien ker pa Lubaŋa mewu. 	Looking at his disciples, he said: “Blessed are you who are poor, for yours is the kingdom of God.
lapok cabun tye kwene? 	where is a distributor of soaps?
bongone komme obeddo nyimi nyimi 	the cloth is full of colourful dots
I kaka pa Cimeon giketo lanyut i kom dano alip apar wiye aryo. I kaka pa Levi giketo lanyut i kom dano alip apar wiye aryo. I kaka pa Icakar giketo lanyut i kom dano alip apar wiye aryo. 	from the tribe of Simeon 12,000, from the tribe of Levi 12,000, from the tribe of Issachar 12,000,
cokko gweno wek pe gucam nyim 	shouting at the chicken, to chase them away, so as to stop them, from eating simsim 
gucako coko ŋide cam ma oloyogi-ni, oromo adita abiro mupoŋ. 	Afterward the disciples picked up seven basketfuls of broken pieces that were left over.
ngwec komme coo mada 	her body smells very badly
cokki wabigerro otwa 	one day we shall build our house 
Dok bene awaco botwu ni, ka jo aryo i kinwu biye kacel lok i kom gin ma gilego, ci Wora ma tye i polo bitimo pigi. 	“Again, truly I tell you that if two of you on earth agree about anything they ask for, it will be done for them by my Father in heaven.
wan i nine man dong wacammo dek labot bot pien kado lig peke 	nowadays we eat saltless food because there is no mineral salt
dakone dong pel pel mada 	the woman is very thin or his wife is very thin or much wasted 
i ododo pa Acoli, kwon ogoyo wii apwoyo ki olek matek ci apwoyo oringgo ocitto woko ki koko ononggo mitto camme 	in the Acholi parable, kwon struck hare's head with the stick (olek) very hard and made him run away crying when hare wants to eat it (kwon) 
Cwiny Maleŋ oneno ni ber, kacel ki wan bene, pe waket yec mapek twatwal i komwu makato lok magi ma pigi tego: 	It seemed good to the Holy Spirit and to us not to burden you with anything beyond the following requirements:
mic macallo meno myerro gimiyo ki Wean twatwal 	such gifts should be given to the poorest people 
tim gin ma imitto, an pud acitto ka yweyo 	do what you like, I am just going to rest quarrelling
ka wumitto gweyo odilo ci cit wunu i bar odilo  	if you want to play football go to the football field
kun waco ni, “Wumiya tek man bene, wek an bene ka aketo ciŋa i kom dano mo olim Cwiny Maleŋ.” 	and said, “Give me also this ability so that everyone on whom I lay my hands may receive the Holy Spirit.”
“Utmego ki wego, wuwiny pido ma akelo i nyimwu.” 	“Brothers and fathers, listen now to my defense.”
pii tye ka ton  	the water is dropping
poyo wiye pi nino meere me wot	reminding him of the day of his journey 
Gin gucito anyim, gukurowa i Teroa. 	These men went on ahead and waited for us at Troas.
Orwone, ka doŋ gulor piny ki i wi got, lwak madwoŋ gurwatte kwede. 	The next day, when they came down from the mountain, a large crowd met him.
gin maber twatwal dano ducu ginenno berre 	what is intrinsically good, everybody sees its goodness 
awekko en tye ka rutto bongone 	I left him sewing her clothes
Doŋ ka yam pe wubedo lugen i kom lim ma pe atir, aŋa ma bimiyowu lonyo me ada? 	I tell you, use worldly wealth to gain friends for yourselves, so that when it is gone, you will be welcomed into eternal dwellings.
okella cam	he brought for me some food
gin angoo ma ngwecce tik kany twatwalli 	what is it that its smell is very bad here?
dakone pe ngeyo colle 	the oman does not know how to push during child birth
Lacen Anac ocwale bot Kayapa, ajwaka madit, kun pud gitweye. 	But if I spoke the truth, why did you strike me?”
Ka doŋ onyiko cok ki Betepage ki Betania, i te got ma gilwoŋo Jeituni, Yecu ocako oro jo aryo ki i kin lupwonynyene, 	As he approached Bethphage and Bethany at the hill called the Mount of Olives, he sent two of his disciples, saying to them,
Lamalaika me adekke oonyo gin ma i i atabone i kulu ki i waŋ it-gu ducu ci gin ducu gulokke gudoko remo. 	The third angel poured out his bowl on the rivers and springs of water, and they became blood.
pe an kena aye ma apwoyogi, ento kadi wa Lurok ducu ma guye Kricito bene gipwoyogi. 	They risked their lives for me
labul tong gweno ngeyo ka pene	who roasts many eggs knows where the embryo is
Luparicayo gudok iye ni, “Wun bene gityeko rwenyowu? 	“No one ever spoke the way this man does,” the guards replied.
mitto latin nyako meno mada 	loves that girl very much
gin ducu ma gipitto i poto man tikko jwwirre ajwiira keken 	all the things planted in this field, do not grow but become stunted
Ka onoŋo gitye i ot, ci lupwonnyene gupenye i kom lok meno. 	When they were in the house again, the disciples asked Jesus about this.
Dano ducu gugamo ni, “Remone obed i wiwa ki i wi litinowa!” 	But the chief priests and the elders persuaded the crowd to ask for Barabbas and to have Jesus executed.
Ka owinyo ni Yecu oa i Judaya, obino i Galilaya, ocito obako doge bote ni obin ocaŋ wode, pien onoŋo doŋ cok to. 	(Now Jesus himself had pointed out that a prophet has no honor in his own country.)
Ento ka Yucepu owinyo ni Arkelao aye doŋ tye ka loc i Judaya ma ka wonne Kerode, omiyo lworo omake me dok kunnu	But when he heard that Archelaus was reigning in Judea in place of his father Herod, he was afraid to go there
mwoddo yen 	cutting off log with an axe bit by bit for firewood
warre ducu ma kitgi pat pat 	all the shoes were of different types 
Pi meno wukwany ciliŋ alip acel-li woko ki bote, wumi bot dano ma tye ki ciliŋ alip apar-ri. 	“‘So take the bag of gold from him and give it to the one who has ten bags.
Wujolle kekenwu, kit macalo Kricito yam doŋ ojolowu kwede, pi deyo pa Lubaŋa. 	so that with one mind and one voice you may glorify the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.
yar bendera malo 	hoist the flag up
Leb bene obedo calo mac. I kin dul komwa leb rom ki lobo ma gin ma en tiyo pe atir, ci balo komwa woko ducu, cwinyo mac i kwowa, i kit ma kwo wirre kwede ducu	The tongue also is a fire, a world of evil among the parts of the body
cibbo lokke i nyim luditto 	to place the matter before the elders
gionynyo jec i pii ma ocung mape mol me nekko litino ober ma tye iye 	jeyes is poured into the stagnant waters to kill the mosquito larvae in it as well as mosquitoes themselves
Ka obino cwiny dyewor nyo okogweno, kun onoŋogi kit meno, lutic meno gitye ki gum. 	It will be good for those servants whose master finds them ready, even if he comes in the middle of the night or toward daybreak.
Ento i adane, Kricito doŋ gicero woko ki i kin jo muto, en tye macalo wi mwaka pa jo muto. 	But Christ has indeed been raised from the dead, the firstfruits of those who have fallen asleep.
pida dong tye ka pirro yoo gudo maber mada 	the PWD are now levelling the road very well
Mumiyo in icwal dano i Jopa gupeny pi Cimon ma gilwoŋo Petero	Send to Joppa for Simon who is called Peter
Pe itam pi gin ma konyi keken, ento tam pi gin ma konyo jo mukene bene. 	then make my joy complete by being like-minded, having the same love, being one in spirit and of one mind.
latin ma woor konynyone yot 	it is easy to help a humble and respectful child
wod pa Yoanan, wod pa Reca, wod pa Jerubabel, wod pa Cealtiel, wod pa Neri, 	the son of Joanan, the son of Rhesa, the son of Zerubbabel, the son of Shealtiel, the son of Neri,
Cimon Petero ogamo ni, “In i Kricito ma Lubaŋa oyero, Wod pa Lubaŋa makwo.” 	Simon Peter answered, “You are the Messiah, the Son of the living God.”
pien yam doŋ wuye lok ma watito botwu. 	This includes you, because you believed our testimony to you.
yaar kolo ki dano gubed iye 	spread the papyrus mat for people to sit on 
putto gwana woko pe ber myerro ikwiny akwinya keken wek dok onywal mukene 	uprooting the cassava is not good, you should only take some of the roots but leave the tree there so that it may produce some more
nedo gin marac mada nwenggo latin woko 	malnutrition of improper weaning is very bad, it makes the child very thin
kiweko calo cun lyec mudong i lil	he or she is deserted like the penis of the elephant in the ashes
Ka Yecu oŋeyo ci openyogi ni, “Piŋo wubedo ka laro lok ni pe wutye ki mugati? Peya wuniaŋ ce? Pe wumako maber? Cwinywu pud nwaŋ? 	Aware of their discussion, Jesus asked them: “Why are you talking about having no bread? Do you still not see or understand? Are your hearts hardened?
gon wii leela odok tung lacam 	turn the bicycle to the left direction
Ka yam abaro i mugati abic pi jo alip abic-ci, ci wucoko ŋide aduku adi?” Gugamo ni, “Apar wiye aryo.” 	When I broke the five loaves for the five thousand, how many basketfuls of pieces did you pick up?” “Twelve,” they replied.
Gitedde cam me otyeno kunnu	Six days before the Passover, Jesus came to Bethany, where Lazarus lived, whom Jesus had raised from the dead.
genno ni limme en aye bilarre 	trusting that his money will save him
ento ŋat ma pe ki gin mo, kadi gin ma en tye kwede gibikwanyo woko ki bote. 	Whoever does not have, even what they have will be taken from them.
Pe otiyo tic matego mapol kunnu, pien onoŋo niyegi pe.	And he did not do many miracles there because of their lack of faith.
mac mejami ki bot dano i dyeceng rac mada 	day light robberies from the people is very bad
I kare ma doŋ onoŋo gucokke kacel, Pilato openyogi ni, “Wumito ni agony botwu aŋa, baraba nyo Yecu ma gilwoŋo Kricito?” 	At that time they had a well-known prisoner whose name was Jesus Barabbas.
welo tin gonynyo beta 	the guests will lodge in my house
latam matek twatwal kare mukene wiye wil woko ka cammo dek pien tammo ni dong ecammo 	sometimes a great thinker forgets to eat because he thinks that he has already eaten
peny ma gipenynye kwede pi gin ma otimme obeddo tek mada 	the questions which he was asked about what happened were very hard
Dok obolo carolok bot jo ma genne kengi, ni kitgi atir, kun gicayo jo mukene. Owaco ni, 	To some who were confident of their own righteousness and looked down on everyone else, Jesus told this parable:
kot man cok awene? 	when is this rain stopping? 
Pe gin aye luyet nyiŋ maber ma gilwoŋowu kwede? 	Are they not the ones who are blaspheming the noble name of him to whom you belong?
Jo ducu ma onoŋo gitye i yeya gucako woro Yecu kun giwaco ni, “Ada, in giri i Wod pa Lubaŋa.” 	And when they climbed into the boat, the wind died down.
oduu pul nyo oduu layata 	poorly developed groundnuts or potatoes
Ento pi kit me juko wek pe oket orom kin dano, ber wajukugi ni pe gimedde ki tito bot ŋat mo pi nyiŋ man.” 	But to stop this thing from spreading any further among the people, we must warn them to speak no longer to anyone in this name.”
lyer dek oyot oyot wek gi cam 	cook vegetables quickly so that they may be eaten
“Ento wun waŋwu tye ki gum, pien gineno piny, itwu bene tye ki gum, pien giwinyo lok. 	But blessed are your eyes because they see, and your ears because they hear.
Ka Yecu onoŋo tye ka pwony i ot pa Lubaŋa, ci openyo ni, “Lupwony-cik mono giwacci Kricito lakwar Daudi piŋo? 	While Jesus was teaching in the temple courts, he asked, “Why do the teachers of the law say that the Messiah is the son of David?
Pien Jon owaco bot Kerode ni, “Cik pe oye ni ibed ki ci-omeru.” 	For John had been saying to Herod, “It is not lawful for you to have your brother’s wife.”
latinne dong omal woko i tim 	the child is now a vagabond, wandering about and lost there, outside the district
Dok owacca ni, “Pi madwoŋ ma i kulu ma ineno ca, ka ma dako ma lakwele obedo iye-ni, magi aye gin dano ma i wi lobo, ki lwak rok ducu ki leb-gu ducu. 	Then the angel said to me, “The waters you saw, where the prostitute sits, are peoples, multitudes, nations and languages.
ngemmo cukari dok madowong twatwal 	taking too much sugar in his hand
Wuki piny, wucuŋ matek likiŋ i kom niyewu, wubed co kikome, wubed ki teko. 	Be on your guard; stand firm in the faith; be courageous; be strong.
i kom latic pe konynyo 	hurrying a worker does not help
mon marro tuk mada me torro dye ot 	women like the earth from the small anthill for making strong the floor of the house
Pien balle doŋ odurre malo lipim, oo wa i polo, Lubaŋa doŋ opo i kom tim maraco ducu ma yam en otimo. 	for her sins are piled up to heaven, and God has remembered her crimes.
latinne kitte rac pyello i kabeddo ducu atata 	the child is bad because it defaecates anyhowly on the bed
ento yam gicoyo ni, “Litino pa Icaka aye gibilwoŋogi ni likwayu.” 	Nor because they are his descendants are they all Abraham’s children
gimakkongi ononggo gitye ka codde i ot cukul 	they were caught having Illicit sexual intercourse in the school 
awal ber me kwon pien pe miyo kwon onynyo toyo iiye macallo can nyonyo ki me lobo mono 	the calabash plate is very good because it does not allow moist formation as in cases with enamel and clay plates
gwaa kom a pi tic ki cabun marac 	roughness of the skin comes as a result of using bad soaps 
latin kwan myerro kong pe obed ki tam me yacco nyako mo ma pud peya otyekko kwanne 	a student must not think of getting a girl pregnant 
man en aye kare me coyo dano me donynyo i mony nyo i acikari 	this is the time for recruiting people into the army 
tyen leelane pe yegge	the wheel of the bicycle is not shaking 
Ka pud wutye ki ceŋ, wuye ceŋ, wek wudok litino me ceŋ.” Yecu ka oloko lok man, ci opokke ki botgi, okanne woko ki botgi. 	The crowd spoke up, “We have heard from the Law that the Messiah will remain forever, so how can you say, ‘The Son of Man must be lifted up’? Who is this ‘Son of Man’?”
Ento Lubaŋa ma kweyo cwiny jo ma can obwoyogi, okweyo cwinywa pi bino pa Tito. 	For when we came into Macedonia, we had no rest, but we were harassed at every turn—conflicts on the outside, fears within.
mon Atiak gubinno ma gurukko pongo woko i badgi ka myel 	the Atiak women came to dance with the ivory armlets worn on their arms
en bene ononggo tye 	he was also there
kok ma tanggo cingge atagga pi can madit ma opotto i komme pi too pa lutunggi liweng 	cries and extends and supinates her hands for pity for the terrible catastrophe that has befallen him for the loss of all his kids and kin
tolle Watt rom mene? 	how long is the rope?
moono lok mung pa lawotti pe ber	to expose secrets of your friend is not good 
man aye wan kikomwa, wan jo ma en olwoŋo, pe ki i kin jo Icrael keken, ento kadi wa ki i kin Lurok ducu bene. 	What if he did this to make the riches of his glory known to the objects of his mercy, whom he prepared in advance for glory—
pot i pii wek ikwang 	dive into water so as to swim
Ci Yucepu oa okwanyo latin ki minne odok kwedgi cen i lobo Icrael. 	So he got up, took the child and his mother and went to the land of Israel.
Lwak askari pa Cecar ducu, ki jo mukene ducu, kombeddi giŋeyo maber ni, an atye i buc pi Kricito. 	Now I want you to know, brothers and sisters, that what has happened to me has actually served to advance the gospel.
lyerro bongo wii tol	to hang the clothes on the line 
pien kany pe watye ki gaŋ mo ma ri nakanaka, ento watye ka yenyo gaŋ ma tye anyim ma cok bino. 	For here we do not have an enduring city, but we are looking for the city that is to come.
Yecu obino, okwanyo mugati, opokkigi, ki rec bene kit meno. 	Jesus said to them, “Come and have breakfast.” None of the disciples dared ask him, “Who are you?” They knew it was the Lord.
toyo kiniga i kom ominne 	he vents his anger on his brother
ci oŋulo laa i waŋe, ka dok oketo ciŋe i kome, openye ni, “Ineno gin mo doŋ?” 	When he had spit on the man’s eyes and put his hands on him, Jesus asked, “Do you see anything?”
ryek apika i dyel caa 	rip open the goat's stomach there
dano gitye ka bakke madowong mada i bar odilo 	the people are assembling themselves in large numbers in the football field
Cwiny Maleŋ kikome ribbe ki cwinywa kun tuco ni, wan litino pa Lubaŋa. 	And by him we cry, “Abba, Father.”
lam Latin olaa i ot 	curse the child to pass urine in the house 
Wan Luparti, jo Media, jo Elam, ki jo ma gibedo i Mecopotamia, Judaya ki Kapadokia, Ponto ki Acia, 	Parthians, Medes and Elamites; residents of Mesopotamia, Judea and Cappadocia, Pontus and Asia,
dano ka oballo myero otuc balle 	when a man has sinned or committed sin he should confess his sin
latin me mwaka agwen myerro tidu dong obed pe i wiye 	a child of four years should have no pit on his head
Lwak gugamo doge ni, “Wan wawinyo ki i cik ni Kricito ma Lubaŋa oyero bedo nakanaka. In dok iwaco niŋniŋ ni Wod pa dano myero gitiŋe malo? Wod pa dano man en aŋa?” 	He said this to show the kind of death he was going to die.
latinne komme yai  	the child is frail
Ka jo tugi guwinyo, ci gubino ka make pien giwaco ni, “En opo woko.” 	When his family heard about this, they went to take charge of him, for they said, “He is out of his mind.”
en laconi mitto nyako ma lanedde 	he wants a slender and a slim girl
orukko tok ma orommo wiye ni cwic 	he put on a hat which fitted him quite well
itimmo ngoo? 	what are you doing? 
wek jwiyo jwic obedi 	do not go on hissing hatred
Ludikon myero gubed wegi mon acel acel, myero gulo litinogi ki odigi bene ducu maber,, 	In the same way, the women are to be worthy of respect, not malicious talkers but temperate and trustworthy in everything.
ento pe gitye ki cwitgi, giye pi Kare manok, ento i kare me omo cwiny gipoto woko. 	They believe for a while, but in the time of testing they fall away.
wek pe ocul 	leave him not to pay
otira macon pe dong twerro pwonynye 	a very old person cannot be taught 
latek dwong mada i ot jokon 	there is a lot of soot in the kitchen 
Ento kombeddi doŋ pe atye ki ka tic mo kany, dok bene onoŋo doŋ abedo ka mito pi mwaka mapol ni abin botwu. 	This is why I have often been hindered from coming to you.
ngat ma ononggo muganga ni en aye dong okello Iwak pekko ducu me nek i wii lobo  	the one who discovered the gun powder is the one who has brought all these killings all over the world
Moses yam obedo lagen i ot pa Lubaŋa ducu macalo latic, pi miyo caden i lok ma gibiloko i kare ma lacen. 	“Moses was faithful as a servant in all God’s house,” bearing witness to what would be spoken by God in the future.
dano ducu ma canne matek me nonggo gin moni, nino ducu nonggo 	every person who tries very hard to get something, always gets it 
pung doggola woko 	shut the door
Pien ŋat ma kette kene ni edit, gibidwoke piny, ŋat ma mwolle kene gibimiye doko dit.” 	For all those who exalt themselves will be humbled, and those who humble themselves will be exalted.”
litino anyira gubinno ma gurukke ki bogi cukul meeggi ma becco mada 	the school girls came dressed in their beautiful uniforms 
ywaa taane ka dong imiina 	puff the cigarette and then give it to me
Ento myero wapwoyu Lubaŋa ma miyowa loc pi Rwotwa Yecu Kricito. 	But thanks be to God! He gives us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.
cit woko ki i gangga 	go out of my home 
teny litino gudong paco 	leave the children to remain at home
latin nyako ni citto kwene? 	to where is this girl going? 
wangge pe lye mullo jammi amulla ki cingge 	he is blind, he finds things by touching them with his fingers
Lok ma dok i kom jo ma pud peya gunyomme, pe anoŋo cik mo ma oa ki bot Rwot, ento amiyo tamma iye macalo dano ma Lubaŋa doŋ otyeko timo kica bote, en mumiyo abedo ŋat ma genne. 	Now about virgins: I have no command from the Lord, but I give a judgment as one who by the Lord’s mercy is trustworthy.
Wun bene yam wucako poro kitwa ki kit pa Rwot, pien wuye lokke i kare ma onoŋo giunowu matek ma wubedo ki yomcwiny ma Cwiny Maleŋ miyo. 	You became imitators of us and of the Lord, for you welcomed the message in the midst of severe suffering with the joy given by the Holy Spirit.
Yecu owacce ni, “Cit giri, wodi bikwo.” Dano meno oye lok ma Yecu owacce, ci ocito. 	The royal official said, “Sir, come down before my child dies.”
la iye onat cammo kwon yengkuu	a person with the flat abdomen, even when he eats food he is not satisfied, that is, his abdomen does not distend
wek doŋ obed ma giyubo woko macalo mot ma wumiyo giwu ki cwinywu kenwu ma pe gidiyowu iye adiya. 	So I thought it necessary to urge the brothers to visit you in advance and finish the arrangements for the generous gift you had promised
Olworo waŋe i komgi ducu, owaco bot dano-nu ni, “Rye badi.” Ci labade otal oryweyo bade, ci bade ocaŋ. 	He looked around at them all, and then said to the man, “Stretch out your hand.” He did so, and his hand was completely restored.
lakeyo dwoggo paneyone ci beddo bot daane 	a niece retums to where her mother was born and stays with her grandmother 
um en aye dul me kom ma okatto ki malo ki i wii dong ma giywee kwedde, yamo ma donynyo citto i oboo ki ma katto wokko ki i oboo katto ki iye 	nose is part of the body that comes out above the upper lip through which the wind which is breathed into the lungs and out pass
danone ka pud tukko kweddi, rwac piny wek ogee cut 	if that man is still playing you, throw him down so that he may know
twak del raa man me acamma koni otyeno 	boil or cook this hippo's hide for a long time for eating in the evening
Gwok nyo ŋat mo bipenyo ni, “Jo muto gicerogi niŋniŋ? Gibibedo ki kit kom macalo niŋniŋ?” 	But someone will ask, “How are the dead raised? With what kind of body will they come?”
en nngeyo cweyo mukeka maber mada 	he knows how to knit very good mats 
pele pa latin meno owekko opotto oturo tyene 	the restlessness of the child made him fall and broke his leg 
nen en caa tye ka wot rabbe ki nget ot caa 	look there, he is walking round the house 
oywec alene yweyo piny maleng mada	the alene broom sweeps very well 
jakko lok ajakka ki dano pe ber	haughtily speech to the people is not good
winyo tuk lamal miyo oo kamoni oyot oyot 	the birds fly high up that is why they arrive quickly anywhere
gecco lawotte pi kwallo kwoo 	he is insinuating his companion for the theft
yaarro kweyo, kal, ki nyim	to spread out sand, millet and simsim
Ento wun aye wugwokke, doŋ atyeko titowu gin ma bibedo i anyim con. 	So be on your guard; I have told you everything ahead of time.
ka lupwonnyene guneno, gujukogi. 	When the disciples saw this, they rebuked them.
Kit macalo jami magi ducu bitum woko kit meno-ni, myero wubed jo ma cal niŋniŋ, kun wulubo kit kwo maleŋ ki me woro lubaŋa? 	Since everything will be destroyed in this way, what kind of people ought you to be? You ought to live holy and godly lives
Pe gibimaro dano wadgi, gibibedo jo ma pe timo kica bot dano, gibibedo lucok dog jo mukene, gibibedo jo ma mitgi pe jukke, jo ma ger ma gidag gin mo maber, 	People will be lovers of themselves, lovers of money, boastful, proud, abusive, disobedient to their parents, ungrateful, unholy,
nyaar anyira ma dito tye iye yer, ento i pa Ittmo anyira yer pe iye 	there is hair in the pubic region ot the big girls but none in the pubic regions of the little girls
luur kal en . 	thresh this millet to remove the chaff
danone lacwi cwi mada pe myero imak banya ki botte, biyelli pirre mape wacce 	the man is a tormentor, he will bother or harass you very much 
latin akwarra kayo dano ni jik jik	a neonate's biting which she bites with toothless gum
gunoŋo jo apar wiye acel ca gucokke kacel, ki jo ma onoŋo tye botgi. 	They got up and returned at once to Jerusalem
par pi gin angoo ma myerro ibitii en aye konynyo 	meditation on what things you will do is useful
dano mukene gitiyo ki labwori me yat, pigge kec mada  	some people use labwori as medicine, its juice is very bitter
aruk dyang ringo mayom maber mada 	the hump of cattle is very soft and nice
moo matye i wii cak twerro libbe 	the cream on the surface of the milk can be skimmed
wangge beddo ni pit-pit, pit pit wang 	looking at things with great desire, lustful
terru kaal wii pero ka twoo iye 	take the millet to the platform to dry
i dye wor ma laworo gimakko lajok ka myel i gang pa Olobogi 	Olik always moves this way or that way before coming out
um ma gwee 	smelling nose 
rangi ma pat pat mere twerro gobbe 	various colours can be alternated or interchanged
Pien cik mogo ma waco ni, “Pe itim abor, pe ineki, pe ikwal, cwinyi pe opukke i kom jami pa ŋat mukene,” ki kwa cik mogo mukene-gu gucokke kacel ki lok man ni, “Mar lawoti macalo imarre keni.” 	Give to everyone what you owe them: If you owe taxes, pay taxes; if revenue, then revenue; if respect, then respect; if honor, then honor.
ka guwinyo, cutcut Catan bino, kwanyo lok ma gicoyo i igi woko. 	As soon as they hear it, Satan comes and takes away the word that was sown in them.
Dano ma kwoŋo ki polo, noŋo kwoŋo ki komker pa Lubaŋa kadi wa ki ŋat ma bedo i wiye-ni. 	And anyone who swears by the temple swears by it and by the one who dwells in it.
pottone laacce rom mune 	what is the size of the field 
ywekka pa laditti owinynye wii lobo ducu 	the fame of this old man was heard all over the world
Pilato olwoŋo ajwagi madito pa Lubaŋa ki luloc ki lwak kacel, 	Pilate called together the chief priests, the rulers and the people,
I kare mukato onoŋo konnye koŋ obedo pe boti, ento kombeddi doŋ konnye dit boti ki bota bene. 	that I appeal to you for my son Onesimus, who became my son while I was in chains.
kare mukene cwinynye ille mitti elweny woko ki dano ma lokko lok atata 	sometimes he feels or his mind is urged to fight with people who talk nonsense
umme tye ka mol 	he has running nose this is the same as above due to cold in the head 
gin gitye ka balo cik pa Cecar ma giwaco ni tye kabaka mukene, en Yecu.” 	They are all defying Caesar’s decrees, saying that there is another king, one called Jesus.”
Dul ma en obedo ka kwanone obedo kit man: “Calo romo ma gitero ka nekone, nyo latin romo ma oliŋ i nyim lanyar yerre, kit meno en pe oŋamo doge ka lok. 	This is the passage of Scripture the eunuch was reading: “He was led like a sheep to the slaughter, and as a lamb before its shearer is silent, so he did not open his mouth.
Dok obolo botgi carolok ni, “Pe tye ŋatti mo ma yeco kiraka ki i kom ginaruka manyenne woko, ci dabo i kom ginaruka muti	But the time will come when the bridegroom will be taken from them; in those days they will fast.”
dwan dano mo ma daŋŋe ki i tim ni, Wuger yo pa Rwot, wutir yone ocuŋ atir.	“a voice of one calling in the wilderness, ‘Prepare the way for the Lord, make straight paths for him.’”
kun waŋ ceŋ oumme woko	for the sun stopped shining
itte operre calo it olik 	his ears are wide as that of a bat
yatte twero putte 	the tree can be uprooted
pee oloo woko 	the ice has melted away
Ka dok wawacci twerone oa ki bot dano kono?” Ento gin gulworo lwak, pien lwak ducu giŋeyo maber ni, Jon aye lanebi atika. 	But if we say, ‘Of human origin’ …” (They feared the people, for everyone held that John really was a prophet.)
latin ma beddo ka twoo twatwal nino ducu jiggo donggo 	a child who is always ill usually becomes stunted in his growth 
Nyako okato woko, openyo minne ni, “Abilego gin aŋo?” Odok iye ni, “Leg wi Jon Labatija.” 	She went out and said to her mother, “What shall I ask for?” “The head of John the Baptist,” she answered.
pung dong canduk woko 	close the box's lid
Ento jo mogo i kingi guwaco ni, “En ryemo cen pi twero pa Beeljebul ladit pa cen.” 	But some of them said, “By Beelzebul, the prince of demons, he is driving out demons.”
Ci owaco ni, “Yecu, po pira ka ibidonyo i kerri.” 	Then he said, “Jesus, remember me when you come into your kingdom.”
payo kom obwol  	whittling the small round stool
goyo laa	blessing 
Ento tye jo mogo i kinwu ma pe giye.” Pien nia i acakki Yecu onoŋo ŋeyo jo meno ma pe ye, ki ŋat ma bidobe. 	The words I have spoken to you—they are full of the Spirit and life.
binika me murro pii tye kwene? 	where is the kettle for boiling water? 
aribe gimaarro cammo kal makatto ducu 	the weaverbirds love to eat millet very much
wek wucam, wumati i dog mejana i kerra, dok wubed i wi komker kun wuŋolo kop ki kaka apar wiye aryo pa jo Icrael. 	so that you may eat and drink at my table in my kingdom and sit on thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.
Wabiwaco aŋo mono doki i kom lok man? Ka Lubaŋa tye tuŋ botwa, ci aŋa ma lakworwa? 	For those God foreknew he also predestined to be conformed to the image of his Son, that he might be the firstborn among many brothers and sisters.
lonyo madowong twatwal nekko dano 	too much riches kill people 
Paulo ociko waŋe i kom lumemba me Lukiko mucokke ci owacci, “Utmego, an abedo ma cwinya leŋ i nyim Lubaŋa nio wa i kare man.” 	Paul looked straight at the Sanhedrin and said, “My brothers, I have fulfilled my duty to God in all good conscience to this day.”
lok cente man ducu odok i dola 	change all these cents into dollars
muggo lokke woko 	concealing the matter 
ogurro ci otuc woko limwam 	hammered the nail in and unexpectedly came out through the surface
owotto lunywan 	he walked naked 
Lukurete ki Luarab, wan ducu wawinyogi ka gitito pi tic madito me twero pa Lubaŋa i leb tuwa kikome.” 	(both Jews and converts to Judaism); Cretans and Arabs—we hear them declaring the wonders of God in our own tongues!”
piŋo doŋ pe ikano limma i beŋŋe, wek ka adwogo, anoŋ kun acoko limma ki magobane?’ 	Why then didn’t you put my money on deposit, so that when I came back, I could have collected it with interest?’
litino ma loka caa laworo gulwallo litino ma kany matek mada i tukko lawalla 	the children over the other side of the river yesterday defeated thoroughly the children of this side in the game of circle 
nek mac woko 	smash all the pots and the calabash bowls in the house which are already broken
kadi bed pe konyo gin mo, abilok i kom gin ma aneno i waŋ lek ki gin ma Rwot onyuto bota. 	I must go on boasting
welo aboro gin aye ma gubinno 	eight guests who have come
nyaarro wic ki magac 	cutting the hair with scissors
Okot dong tye ka pal apala 	Okot is getting thin and thinner or Okot is becoming more and more emaciated
pokko gin man pe tek	to divide this thing is not difficult 
guyeto Lubaŋa me polo pi arem ki bur ma otoko komgi woko, dok bene pe guŋut i kom gin ma gutimo. 	and cursed the God of heaven because of their pains and their sores, but they refused to repent of what they had done.
Ka Laparicayo ma onoŋo olwoŋe-ni oneno, oloko i iye kekene ni, “Kono dano man lanebi, kono oniaŋ i kom dako ma ogude-ni, ki kite, ni en labalo.” 	When the Pharisee who had invited him saw this, he said to himself, “If this man were a prophet, he would know who is touching him and what kind of woman she is—that she is a sinner.”
Ka gitiŋe malo wek obed i ŋet Lubaŋa yo tuŋ acuc i kabedo me deyo, ci ogamo Cwiny Maleŋ ki bot Wonne kit ma yam Lubaŋa ociko, ci oonyo i komwa gin man ma doŋ wuneno dok bene wuwinyo-ni. 	Exalted to the right hand of God, he has received from the Father the promised Holy Spirit and has poured out what you now see and hear.
Gwok nyo wutamo ni lok pa Lubaŋa yam oa ki botwu ba, dok obino botwu keken? 	Or did the word of God originate with you? Or are you the only people it has reached?
gicel gicel myerro kong wucito wurotto kitte ma paco tye kwedde 	now and then you should go home to find out how it is
Ka Yecu oloko lok man, ci cwinye opoto, oloko atyer ni, “Adada awacciwu ni, ŋat acel i kinwu bidoba.” 	“I am telling you now before it happens, so that when it does happen you will believe that I am who I am.
caane opotto i pii i kare ma etye ka rukkone 	his watch fell into the water while he was putting it on
ka akwotta ne tkii ci gilwonggo ni awang mac 	when the swelling is small then it is called awati mac
Ento i kare ma Galio aye obedo laloyo me lobo Akaya, ci Lujudaya gucokke gutube i kom Paulo, ŋukele wa i nyim kom me ŋolo kop, 	While Gallio was proconsul of Achaia, the Jews of Corinth made a united attack on Paul and brought him to the place of judgment.
dogola gilorro lakucel keken 	the door is closed only on one side
Dako ma cware oto ma odoŋ kene laboŋo ŋat mo ma konye, keto genne ducu i kom Lubaŋa, dok bene bako doge kun lego Lubaŋa dyeceŋ ki dyewor. 	But if a widow has children or grandchildren, these should learn first of all to put their religion into practice by caring for their own family and so repaying their parents and grandparents, for this is pleasing to God.
An dok awaco botwu aye ni, kinaga twero donyo i waŋ libira oyot, makato lalonyo me donyo i ker pa Lubaŋa.” 	Again I tell you, it is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle than for someone who is rich to enter the kingdom of God.”
obeddo ka jwang go lokke atata 	he did not make a straight forward statement
ento Yecu kikome pe obedo ki gen i komgi, 	Then they believed the scripture and the words that Jesus had spoken.
Lok ma awaco botwu-ni, awaco bot dano ducu ni, Wuki piny.”	What I say to you, I say to everyone: ‘Watch!’”
ladit cukul ma litino ducu gilworre mada (worre) 	a headteacher who is respected by all the school children
Nyo itwero waco bot omeru niŋniŋ ni, ‘Omera, wek akwany cuŋ kal ma tye i waŋi-ni woko,’ kun in kikomi pe ineno dul yat ma tye i waŋi In lagoba, koŋ ikwoŋ kwanyo dul yat ma tye i waŋi-ni woko, ci miyo doŋ ineno piny maber me kwanyo cuŋ kal ma tye i waŋ omeru ca. 	How can you say to your brother, ‘Brother, let me take the speck out of your eye,’ when you yourself fail to see the plank in your own eye? You hypocrite, first take the plank out of your eye, and then you will see clearly to remove the speck from your brother’s eye.
dano ma timmo jammi atyer en aye dano maber 	a man who is transparent in what he does is a good person 
ento ka pe wutimo kica bot dano pi balgi, ci Wonwu ma tye i polo bene pe bitimowu kica pi balwu. 	And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from the evil one.’
pien wan wa dul kome. 	After all, no one ever hated their own body, but they feed and care for their body, just as Christ does the church—
Gupenye ni, “Lapwony, waŋeyo ni in iloko dok ipwonyo lok ma tye atir, pe ipoko kin dano, ento ipwonyo yo pa Lubaŋa ki ada. 	So the spies questioned him: “Teacher, we know that you speak and teach what is right, and that you do not show partiality but teach the way of God in accordance with the truth.
Jekaria openyo lamalaika ni, “Abiŋeyo man niŋniŋ? Pien an doŋ ati woko, dakona bene doŋ oti.” 	Zechariah asked the angel, “How can I be sure of this? I am an old man and my wife is well along in years.”
yenynyo lweny 	looking for fighting
litino gimaarro mada cammo layata ma mitteni 	the children love very much eating the sweet type of potatoes
komme obedo alulo 	its body is long and round
yatte ka pe twerro munynye nono ci mat ki pii 	if the medicine cannot be swallowed by itself, then swallow it with water
wek en ojiŋ cwinywu obed tek dok wubed jo maleŋ laboŋo lok mo ma loyowa i nyim Lubaŋa Wonwa, i kare me dwogo pa Rwotwa Yecu ki jone maleŋ ducu.	May he strengthen your hearts so that you will be blameless and holy in the presence of our God and Father when our Lord Jesus comes with all his holy ones.
en obeddo namba adii? 	what number was he? 
tye ka yuyo taa ki umme i odde 	he is sniffing tobacco with his nose in his house 
Dwan meno yam wawinyo oa ki i polo ada, pien onoŋo wan watye kacel kwede kunnu i wi got maleŋ. 	We ourselves heard this voice that came from heaven when we were with him on the sacred mountain.
ma olimo gum mua ki bot Lubaŋa dok openyo ni giwek eyeny kabedo pi Lubaŋa pa Yakobo. 	who enjoyed God’s favor and asked that he might provide a dwelling place for the God of Jacob.
myerro pe gkiworo wii ageca 	a slave must not be pampered
An pe alimo deyo ki bot dano, 	yet you refuse to come to me to have life.
Ento atitti ni, can pa Codom bibedo tworatwora i nino me ŋolo kop, makato can ma bipoto i komi.” 	But I tell you that it will be more bearable for Sodom on the day of judgment than for you.”
yutto rec ki goli ki i pii	to jerk a fish out with a hook from the water 
komme gum pien obeddo ngat acel i kom joo ma okatto peny 	he was lucky because he was one of those who passed the examinations 
citto ka lillo tyenne maleng 	going to clean her legs very clean
I kin mon magi onoŋo tye iye Maliam Lamagdala ki Maliam min Yakobo ki Yucepu, ki min litino pa Jebedayo. 	When the centurion and those with him who were guarding Jesus saw the earthquake and all that had happened, they were terrified, and exclaimed, “Surely he was the Son of God!”
Ka pud gitye ka camo cam me otyeno, ma doŋ Catan oketo tam i cwiny Juda wod pa Cimon me Keriot me dobe, 	Having loved his own who were in the world, he loved them to the end.
Ka nino abic okato, ajwaka madit Anania obino ki ludoŋo mogo, kacel ki laplida mo ma nyiŋe Tertulo, ci gutero adotgi i nyim laloyo pi doto Paulo. 	Five days later the high priest Ananias went down to Caesarea with some of the elders and a lawyer named Tertullus, and they brought their charges against Paul before the governor.
danone larany lok 	he is a man who always speaks scornfully and sarcastically
gin ma kit meno pud onen kany tyen acel keken	such things like that, occurred here only once
ribbo dano aryo ma yang ononggo gidagge wek gumaare 	to reconcile two people who used to hate each other to become friendly
Ka ŋat mo tye ki jami me lobo man madwoŋ, ce oneno ominne ma piny oloyo, ento okwero miye kony, ci mar pa Lubaŋa bedo i iye niŋniŋ? 	If anyone has material possessions and sees a brother or sister in need but has no pity on them, how can the love of God be in that person?
layata opuri woko  	the potatoes have grown mouldy and rotten
wet lum ot  	pull out grass from the root of the house
Ci ooro dano ocito omiyo giŋolo ŋut Jon woko ki i mabuc, 	Prompted by her mother, she said, “Give me here on a platter the head of John the Baptist.”
ento dano ma bibino ma lubo kora, an pe amyero me gonyo war tyene.’ 	But there is one coming after me whose sandals I am not worthy to untie.’
wee wii motoka odok tung lacam 	turn the motor car to the left
Kadi gicikke mukwoŋo ca bene yam obedo ki cik mogo me woro Lubaŋa, dok bene obedo ki kabedo mo maleŋ me lobo man. 	Now the first covenant had regulations for worship and also an earthly sanctuary.
obworo pyen gabbo obwoone i jang yat 	the spider hangs or suspends its web from the branches of trees
I kaka pa Acer giketo lanyut i kom dano alip apar wiye aryo. I kaka pa Naputali giketo lanyut i kom dano alip apar wiye aryo. I kaka pa Manace giketo lanyut i kom dano alip apar wiye aryo. 	from the tribe of Asher 12,000, from the tribe of Naphtali 12,000, from the tribe of Manasseh 12,000,
coo mitto anyira ma bocco ma igi onat 	the men like tall girls with flat abdomen 
Lacen lupwonnye gubino bot Yecu gupenye ni, “Piŋo iloko kwedgi i carolok?” 	The disciples came to him and asked, “Why do you speak to the people in parables?”
wer me lobo 	National Anthem 
onoŋo tye Maliam Lamagdala, ki Maliam min Yucepu matidine ki Yoce, ki Calume. 	Among them were Mary Magdalene, Mary the mother of James the younger and of Joseph, and Salome.
odig tye ka cwer i umme 	he is bleeding through the nose or having nose bleeding 
“Iyo, utmega, aŋeyo ni yam wutimo man ma onoŋo wukwiya, macalo luditowu bene. 	“Now, fellow Israelites, I know that you acted in ignorance, as did your leaders.
olug cet en aye yoo kama cet katti iye ka gipyello 	anus is the opening through which the faeces pass, when it is defaecatingolug actually means that it moulds the faeces into shapes
Meno aye mumiyo wacanne dok wacukke me tic matek, pien waketo genwa i kom Lubaŋa makwo, ma en Lalar pa jo ducu, ento makatone pa jo ma ye Yecu. 	This is a trustworthy saying that deserves full acceptance.
latin myerro gipwony owek beddo ka nyunyo cet atata 	a child must be taught not to pass stools all over the place
binika en aye obeddo callo agulo ento tye ki laum wiye, wenne tye me makkone ki dongge ma oywaane kama leg ma pii matye i iye gityo kwedde katti woko 	a kettle is a container, which is just like a pot but has a lid for covering it, a handle and a spout
calle twerro nyutte 	the picture can be shown
ojubbo nyim pong aduko li bic 	he took the simsim full to the brim of the basket
en tye maber 	he is quite well
wiye yot 	he is quick, agile and ready
tello tol bollo cing	pulling the rope in a game of tug of war causes blisters
diyo cwiny i ciro can weko gipwoyo kitwa, ka doŋ pwoyo kitwa-ni miyowa bedo ki gen. 	Not only so, but we also glory in our sufferings, because we know that suffering produces perseverance;
I kare ma awinyo lok man dok ma anenogi, cutcut aryebbe woko piny ka tyen lamalaika ma onyutta gin magi ka amiye woro	And when I had heard and seen them, I fell down to worship at the feet of the angel who had been showing them to me.
Aŋa ma cito i mony, ci cako culo mucarane pire kene? Aŋa ma pito olok i potone ma pe camo nyig olok mucek iye? Lakwat mene ma pe mato cak ma a i kom lim ma en kwayo. 	Who serves as a soldier at his own expense? Who plants a vineyard and does not eat its grapes? Who tends a flock and does not drink the milk?
ogit git ma tye tee lacim dim a rem mada 	the hangnail under the nail of my second finger is very painful 
wawekko mac pud tye ka lyel i ot 	we left the light still on in the house
pien pe tye ŋatti mo ma twero tiyo lanyut meno ma in itiyo, ka Lubaŋa pe tye kwede.” 	He came to Jesus at night and said, “Rabbi, we know that you are a teacher who has come from God
bongoni tika twerro nwoone me Iwokkone dok aye? 	can this clothe be washed again? 
pimmo lee ki luduko me acella 	aiming at animals with the gun for shooting
Oyotoyot two agobine ocaŋ woko, ci oŋeyo ki i kome kene ni doŋ ecaŋ woko ki i twone. 	Immediately her bleeding stopped and she felt in her body that she was freed from her suffering.
ento ŋat ma bikwera i nyim dano, an bene abikwere woko i nyim Wora ma tye i polo. 	But whoever disowns me before others, I will disown before my Father in heaven.
Pi meno, wan ma doŋ giorowa i tic man pi kica pa Lubaŋa cwinywa pe dok tye ka dok cen. 	But I was lowered in a basket from a window in the wall and slipped through his hands.
kwkii ma tidi ma pwot mabor ma komme kwar ma yibbe okarre iye aryo ma makko ki la ayo ki jam. 	a small long brown insect with a curved divided end of the tail with which it catches or bites things
nywallo latin	to give birth to a child  
dyangi tye ma gupec kany mada  	the cattle are in plenty here
dok gimaro bedo i kom pa ludito ka gitye i kacokke, dok gimaro bedo i kabedo me deyo i karama. 	and have the most important seats in the synagogues and the places of honor at banquets.
yamo oputto wii ot odong lapel 	the wind blew off part of the root and left it partially open
nenni gujinno lokke woko 	it appears that they have suppressed the case 
wangga yoo me tyen en aye ber, 	the footpath is the one that is good
latinne dok lagigi twatwal mitto mere beddo ki minne keken 	she is a fretful child who wants to be with her mother only
onoŋo in bene pe kica twero maki i kom latic lawoti-nu, kit macalo onoŋo kica omaka i komi-ni?’ 	‘You wicked servant,’ he said, ‘I canceled all that debt of yours because you begged me to.
gigurro bendera wa i wii lacol got 	the flag has been hoisted at the peak of the mountain
dok wutye ka kuro Wode ma bidwogo ki i polo, ma yam en ocero woko ki i kin jo muto, en aye Yecu ma olarowa ki i akemo pa Lubaŋa ma bibino.	and to wait for his Son from heaven, whom he raised from the dead—Jesus, who rescues us from the coming wrath.
Pien i kare ma yam Moses otyeko tito bot lwak gin ma giciko ducu ma tye i i cik, en okwanyo remo roci dyaŋ ki dyegi, kacel ki pii, ki yer romo makwar, ki yat anyero, okiro i kom buk kikome, ki i kom lwak ducu bene, 	When Moses had proclaimed every command of the law to all the people, he took the blood of calves, together with water, scarlet wool and branches of hyssop, and sprinkled the scroll and all the people.
Luco ginacoya yam con onoŋo doŋ guŋeyo woko ni, Lubaŋa bikwano Lurok ni gin jo ma kitgi atir pi niye. Lubaŋa yam otito lok me kwena maber con bot Abraim kun wacce ni, “Rok ducu bilimo gum piri.” 	Understand, then, that those who have faith are children of Abraham.
yoo me citto ka kwan i Bungereja dong ocengge woko 	short people have many words, that is, they are very troublesome 
pyerre lit 	he has backache 
pi kokko too, obolle kenne ni tac marac mada 	because mourning, she threw herself very badly on the ground
Ento bedo yot bot polo ki lobo me tum woko, makato ton acel me cik me balle. 	Since that time, the good news of the kingdom of God is being preached, and everyone is forcing their way into it.
um twerro beddo ma okongne nyo ma obab	the nose can be hooked
pi man waye ni ia ki bot Lubaŋa.” 	Now we can see that you know all things and that you do not even need to have anyone ask you questions
ot wang it man wek omol maber 	clear this water well very well to make it flow 
ka oŋiye matek, ci owaco ni, “Dano man bene nakanen tye kacel kwede.” 	She looked closely at him and said, “This man was with him.”
Wubed ki kica i kom jo mogo ma gitye ka cabbe acaba, 	keep yourselves in God’s love as you wait for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ to bring you to eternal life.
Orwone, ma en aye nino ma lubo nino me Yubbe, ajwagi madito pa Lubaŋa ki Luparicayo gucokke i nyim Pilato, 	Mary Magdalene and the other Mary were sitting there opposite the tomb.
Ento Rwot ogamo ni, “Marita, Marita, ibedo ki tam mapol, cwinyi oŋabbe pi jami mapol, 	“Martha, Martha,” the Lord answered, “you are worried and upset about many things,
cikko agwak ma dongoni ata rac mada, pien tyen dano twerro mokko iye bene	indiscriminate setting up of the traps for big animals is very dangerous because the people's legs could be caught them
Waraga man oa ki bot Paulo ma en lakwena pa Kricito Yecu pi miti pa Lubaŋa, ki bot ominwa Temceo. Bot jo muye Lubaŋa ma tye i Korint, kacel ki jo pa Lubaŋa ducu ma gitye i lobo Akaya ducu: 	May the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the fellowship of the Holy Spirit be with you all.
tye ka gable ni mon pa joo mukene pe gingeyo teddo dek mabecco 	he is despising that other people's wives do not know how to cook good food
litino man guding pe gitwerro gengge me binno ka tukko i baar odilo 	these children are sturbbon, they cannot be prevented from coming to play in the football field 
gitye ka gucce ki lwak rec matino i nam ma gumakko ma cek pe yee 	they are throwing back the small fishes into the lake which they caught
min kulu omakko latin woko 	the river or brook spirit has got hold of the child 
jul ajulla genggo dano woko ka binno ka limmi 	sulkiness prevents people from visiting you 
Ka dok owacca ni, “Pe imwon lok magi ma gitito i buk-ki woko, pien kare doŋ cok. 	Then he told me, “Do not seal up the words of the prophecy of this scroll, because the time is near.
akwerro tim atata 	I refused misbehaviour
rit tungu en aye gicweyo kwedde aduku ki odero 	the ribs of the borassus palms are the ones that are used for making baskets and winnows 
yat twerro tonne i wang latin 	the medicine can be dropped into the child's eyes
nyaarro lum ki nyarro nyim 	slashing the grass and harvesting the simsim 
oborro en ki wer 	he praised him with songs 
koti arkii ber makatto ducu 	the silk coat is very good
tamme pud dong tek	the thought of it is still difficult
dako pa gull iye kec mada pien en lalur 	so and so's wife is very bitter because she is barren 
piny oro 	dry season
Lacen ki i ŋegi ducu, dako bene oto. 	The same thing happened to the second and third brother, right on down to the seventh.
komme wac pe mitto pur	he is very lazy, he does not want to cultivate the ground
ber mape wacce 	very good indeed, excellent
roo tol i libira 	thread the needle 
pi tyengi ma bocco ni wekko giriggo ma dwir twatwal 	because of their long legs, make them run very fast
Tye bene kit meno i kom cer pa jo muto. Kodi ma gicoyo-ni en gin ma top	So will it be with the resurrection of the dead
Pe alego ni myero ikwanygi woko ki i lobo, ento ni igwokgi ki i kom gin marac. 	None has been lost except the one doomed to destruction so that Scripture would be fulfilled.
Pilipo odokke iye ni, “Kwon me denari miya aryo pe biromogi, wek ŋat acel acel ogam manok.” 	He asked this only to test him, for he already had in mind what he was going to do.
ogurro bura ki lakkii 	he threw a stone at the cat 
pi lok ada ma bedo i cwinywa, dok bene bibedo kwedwa nakanaka: 	The elder, To the lady chosen by God and to her children, whom I love in the truth—and not I only, but also all who know the truth—
jany korayo kany wek dano guwok iye 	push the grass aside here to make way so that the people may pass through
umme oding woko 	his nose is blocked
dano ma laconya myerro beddo ki tegge ki botwa kany 	one who always abuses people must be far away from us 
Askari guyubo ni ginek lumabuc woko ducu, wek acel mo pe okwaŋ oriŋ woko matwal, 	The soldiers planned to kill the prisoners to prevent any of them from swimming away and escaping.
kella doki odocco 	bring it to me again 
Miwa nino ki nino camwa me nino ducu. 	Give us each day our daily bread.
oboro twol, nyo roc twol 	the shed skin of snakes
gin anngoo ma galle ma miyo en pe binno oyot oyot? 	what prevents him from coming as soon as possible?
twol tonggo dano 	the snake bites people
Yecu odokkigi iye ni, “Ceŋ pe ayerowu wun apar wiye aryo? Ento acel i kinwu pa Catan.” 	We have come to believe and to know that you are the Holy One of God.”
Pe wudok luwackom, ento wulub kit pa jo ma pi niyegi, ki pi diyo cwinygi, gitye ka noŋo gin ma yam Lubaŋa ociko pire. 	We do not want you to become lazy, but to imitate those who through faith and patience inherit what has been promised.
Onoŋo ceŋ aniaŋ man maber, omiyo yam ayubo ni koŋ acak wotta ki botwu, wek wunoŋ kica kiryo. 	as you have understood us in part, you will come to understand fully that you can boast of us just as we will boast of you in the day of the Lord Jesus.
Lupwonnyene pe guniaŋ man koŋ	“Do not be afraid, Daughter Zion; see, your king is coming, seated on a donkey’s colt.”
pien yam gicoyo ni, Gin ducu ma tye ki kom obedo calo lum, deyone ducu rom ki deyo pa tur lum. Lum ner, ature bene o woko, 	He was chosen before the creation of the world, but was revealed in these last times for your sake.
acikari myerro pe giwotto ki bongo me lwenygi i kin dano ataa ka lweny peke	soldiers should not walk about in the battle fatigue uniform if there is no war
cogge ogwenynye woko ka gweyo odilo 	his knee became dislocated while he was playing football 
Ka doŋ wacuko cwiny Tito ni, kit macalo yam doŋ en ocako tic man me kica i kinwu, myero bene doŋ ocob woko. 	And they exceeded our expectations: They gave themselves first of all to the Lord, and then by the will of God also to us.
obillo latin oweko dong odokko ming woko 	he charmed the child and made him to become foolish
Paulo owaco bote ni, “Lubaŋa bene bidoŋi, in kor ot ma gipuyu matar-ri! In ibedo ka ŋolla kop i te cik, dok iciko ni gidoŋa laboŋo lubo cik?” 	Then Paul said to him, “God will strike you, you whitewashed wall! You sit there to judge me according to the law, yet you yourself violate the law by commanding that I be struck!”
tye ka ride i kom dyang mape mere 	he is persisting in claiming the cow which is not his
tye ki tiki tikine me wot i dege 	he has an air ticket for 
dakone lacaar caar  	his wife is loose
lekko citto i London, dreamings going to London 	maaro lekko twatwal pi katto penynye ka tye ka peny 
en latet maber mada me palaa 	he is a very good blacksmith of making knives
Kombeddi an gira cwinya yom i can ma aneno piwu, pien pi arem ma atye ka cirone i koma, atye ka miyo kony me tyeko gin murem i can pa Kricito, pi kome, ma en aye jo muye en. 	But now he has reconciled you by Christ’s physical body through death to present you holy in his sight, without blemish and free from accusation—
twara ma idonyo i kwo ma ciŋi lakucel peke nyo laput, ber makato ma ibedo ki ciŋi aryo nyo tyeni ducu giboli kwede woko i mac ma pe to. 	It is better for you to enter life maimed or crippled than to have two hands or two feet and be thrown into eternal fire.
en naka pe olokko kitmeno 	he did not really say so
ocitto ka onynyo pii 	he went to pour out water 
tye gin wic ma pat pat, mukene me mony ki mukene me jami mukene 	there are various types of hats, some for the army and some for some other things 
dako wotto ni janga janga ki atego i tyenne 	the woman walks a stately gait with her ankle full of mental anklets
Ci odaŋŋe ma dwane winnye matek twatwal ni, “Babilon madit doŋ opoto, opoto gire woko! Doŋ odoko kabedo pa jogi, odoko bene ka kanne pa cen maraco ducu, ki pa winyo maraco ma i dano kwero. 	With a mighty voice he shouted: “‘Fallen! Fallen is Babylon the Great!’ She has become a dwelling for demons and a haunt for every impure spirit, a haunt for every unclean bird, a haunt for every unclean and detestable animal.
Jo mapol doŋ gutemo coyo lok i kom gin ma otimme i kinwa, 	Many have undertaken to draw up an account of the things that have been fulfilled among us,
acokko yenna laworo	I gathered my firewood yesterday
buk manyen 	a new book
cuk cwiny lutukko wek gucit gutuk matek 	encourage the sportsmen so that they may go and play well
gweno bollo tongge 	the chicken lays its eggs
pwon lemun ikel me amatta 	pluck the lemon and bring it for drinking
Gutito lok ma otimme i waŋayo, ki kit ma giŋeye kwede i kare ma obaro mugati. 	and saying, “It is true! The Lord has risen and has appeared to Simon.”
Ŋat ma maro ominne bedo i leŋo, ma pe iye gin mo ma miyo dano poto i bal. 	Anyone who loves their brother and sister lives in the light, and there is nothing in them to make them stumble.
danone nen callo cen omakko woko 	the man looks as if he is possessed by the evil spirit or ghost 
latine lik pe tiyo cura ne oyot oyot 	the child is slow and dull, he does not do his mathematics quickly 
boyo pul ma dong gibitto woko ki bongo 	wrapping shelled groundnuts with a piece of cloth
nyotto layata me nyubbo ki cak	mashing the potatoes for mixing with milk
gammo dong 	opening the mouth 
lacooni doki gwirro lok twatwal i kom gin ma dong gityekko 	this man insist obstinately on matter which has already been settled
Kwarowa macon ducu yam obedo megi, dok Kricito bene ginywalo i kingi i kit pa dano. Myero gipwo Lubaŋa ma loyo jami ducu nakanaka. Amen. 	For I could wish that I myself were cursed and cut off from Christ for the sake of my people, those of my own race,
Ento Festo onoŋo mito ni Lujudaya gupwoye, ci owaco bot Paulo ni, “Imito giteri i Jerucalem wek aŋol kop i komi pi adot magi ki kunnu?” 	Festus, wishing to do the Jews a favor, said to Paul, “Are you willing to go up to Jerusalem and stand trial before me there on these charges?”
kare mukene cwinynye puk ni elweny woko i kom joo mogo ma gilokko lok me anywar anywar i kin dano 	sometimes he feels urged to fight with those who talk arrogantly among the people
jami ducu myero dong gitin atinna 	there must be thriftness in the use of things 
anywallo rudi i dwee me apar i mwaka ma okatto 	I gave birth to twins in the tenth month of last year
wii otti twerro yakke wek dong giger maber 	the root ot this house has to be taken down so that another good one can be constructed instead
agulu pii odiyo  otac	water pot presses upon the otac
Ka ce dano doŋ gubwot woko ki i cilo me bal me lobo pi ŋeyo Rwotwa ma en Lalarwa Yecu Kricito, ka dok pud gumoko i kom bal meno ci loyogi woko matwal, bimiyo gibedo marac lacenne makato ma yam con. 	If they have escaped the corruption of the world by knowing our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ and are again entangled in it and are overcome, they are worse off at the end than they were at the beginning.
amitto ngeyo ngat ma lapyem i kinwu ma mitto kello ayella wek gimak woko 	I want to know anyone among you who is a protester so that he may be arrested 
wutwerro rommo i Kampala 	you can meet in Kampala 
golle pa dye gudo dong tye ka medde amedda 	the pot holes in the roads are increasing steadily
Ka Temceo obino, wunen ni wumiyo en obedo i kinwu laboŋo lworo mo, pien en bene tiyo tic pa Rwot calo an kikoma. 	When Timothy comes, see to it that he has nothing to fear while he is with you, for he is carrying on the work of the Lord, just as I am.
guk lakwoo ma nog go pud tye ka kwoo ci pe dong  	surprise the thief while he is still lealing and he will not contest for his innocence 
Ka doŋ gucako dok i Jerucalem ki i wi got Jeituni, ma cok ki Jerucalem, rom ki wot me ceŋ cabit. 	Then the apostles returned to Jerusalem from the hill called the Mount of Olives, a Sabbath day’s walk from the city.
pe ya odwogo 	not yet returned or come back 
pali ma ding twatwal pe becco ki mon 	tight pair of trousers are not good for women
I nino mo Petero ki Jon guito malo i ot pa Lubaŋa i cawa me lega, cawa aboŋwen 	One day Peter and John were going up to the temple at the time of prayer—at three in the afternoon.
wanggayo man twerro jiye maber 	this path can easily be blocked 
kella bongo mukene 	bring for me another dress
Ogwok nonggo mon mabecco mada ci ento mon giriggo woko ki coo mukene pien en lalur 	Mr Ogwok always gets very charming women but they run away with other men because he is barren
puu dye ot man diki ki opuyu ma girubbo ki cet dyang pien dong olurre woko 	smear the floor of this house tomorrow with the black soil mixed with cow dung because it is worn out now 
latin tye ocung i wii piti caa 	the child is standing there on the old rubbish heap
mine cuka wek ocit oumme kwedde 	give him the sheet of cloth so that he may cover himself with it 
I kare meno cik oa bot Cecar Augucito ni gico nyiŋ dano ducu ma i wi lobo. 	And no one after drinking old wine wants the new, for they say, ‘The old is better.’”
Ka wao i Jerucalem, utmego gujolowa ki yomcwiny. 	When we arrived at Jerusalem, the brothers and sisters received us warmly.
wek omi lok ma yam lanebi oloko ocobbe kakare ni, “Abiwaco botwu lok i carolok, abitito botwu lok ma yam okanne woko cakke wa i acakki piny.” 	So was fulfilled what was spoken through the prophet: “I will open my mouth in parables, I will utter things hidden since the creation of the world.”
amitto tok macol 	I want a black hat 
nyutto cal ki dano 	to show picture to the people
Pi meno, kombeddi pe dok giŋolo kop loyo jo ma gibedo i Kricito Yecu. 	For the wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life in Christ Jesus our Lord.
Ka oloko lok man, ci dako mo ki i kin lwak owoto dwane, owacce ni, “Tye ki gum ic ma onywali, ki tuno ma idoto!” 	As Jesus was saying these things, a woman in the crowd called out, “Blessed is the mother who gave you birth and nursed you.”
anyira ma yang con gimaarro cokke ka citto ka cot 	the past girls used to gather themselves and go for illicit sexual activities
Ka abioro Artema nyo Tukiko boti, ket tek ibin bota i Nikopoli, pien doŋ atyeko moko tamma me bedo kunnu i kare me koyo. 	You may be sure that such people are warped and sinful; they are self-condemned.
nen ni bio kany diki 	it appears that he will arrive here tomorrow
tim kit meno, ci ibikwo.” 	“Do this and you will live.”
ka gua ki kunnu gukwaŋ nio i Antiokia, ka ma yam gimiyogi iye i ciŋ Lubaŋa wek en okonygi ki kicane i kom tic ma doŋ gutyeko cobone-ni. 	From Attalia they sailed back to Antioch, where they had been committed to the grace of God for the work they had now completed.
latel wic wa agaa ka waecitto ka nenno rwot? 	who is our leader when we are going to see the chief? 
ka guketogi i nyim luŋolkop, ci guwaco ni, “Jo man gin Lujudaya, ci gurubo gaŋwa woko. 	They brought them before the magistrates and said, “These men are Jews, and are throwing our city into an uproar
pwomo en aye yat ma lak alakka ci nyakko nyigge ma olungge ma katto tong gweno manok ma komme obeddo kikwar kwar ma ka ityerro nyigge ni ci inonggo pigge mamit mada ma tye iye nyigge matitino 	the passion fruit plant is one of the plants that runs along the ground or round a tree up to the top of the tree, it produces purplish fruits, which when you break, you find very nice sweet juice with 
con iloko i dog kwarowa Daudi ma laticci i tek pa Cwiny Maleŋ ma owaco ni, ‘Piŋo Lurok gitye ka wo kacel, dok piŋo rok mapol gipiro lok ma konnye pe? 	You spoke by the Holy Spirit through the mouth of your servant, our father David: “‘Why do the nations rage and the peoples plot in vain?
bongo yer rug woko ka gilwokko i pii ma ngic	a woollen dress wrinkles if washed in cold water
labwor en aye guu acel madit dok mager bene mada i kom guu mukene, gitye kitgi aryo 	a lion is one of the predators which is very big and most powerful of the cat family
Cakke i cawa meno cutcut Juda ocako yenyo kare maber ma eromo miyo kwede Yecu i ciŋgi. 	From then on Judas watched for an opportunity to hand him over.
Ka cawa oromo, Yecu obedo piny i dog cam, kacel ki lukwena. 	When the hour came, Jesus and his apostles reclined at the table.
ka ibeddo geer i kom lutic meerri ci ibwanggogi pe dong gitiyo maber 	when you are cruel to your workers, you frighten them and they will not work well 
dok wek gityer gitum, macalo gicoyo i cik pa Rwot ni, “amam aryo, nyo litino akuri aryo.” 	and to offer a sacrifice in keeping with what is said in the Law of the Lord: “a pair of doves or two young pigeons.”
Ci won poto olok bitimogi niŋniŋ? En bibino, ci neko lupur woko ducu, ci miyo poto olok woko bot jo mukene. 	“What then will the owner of the vineyard do? He will come and kill those tenants and give the vineyard to others.
I kare ma onoŋo gidonyo ki Paulo i gogo, Paulo owaco bot kapten ni, “Ber koŋ alok boti lok mo?” Ci ogamo ni, “In iŋeyo leb Grik? 	As the soldiers were about to take Paul into the barracks, he asked the commander, “May I say something to you?” “Do you speak Greek?” he replied.
ogilo lak pa gun ducu gibocco mada pien en aye me yecco ringo ma gicammo 	the canine tooth of all the predators are very long because they are for tearing off meat for eating
Lok man ni, “Odoŋ kicel,” nyuto ni, gibikwanyo gin ma yeŋŋe woko, meno ginaketa, ka gin ma pe yeŋŋe cako doŋ. 	The words “once more” indicate the removing of what can be shaken—that is, created things—so that what cannot be shaken may remain.
gin jo ma doŋ gudyero kwogi pi Rwotwa Yecu Kricito. 	men who have risked their lives for the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.
ocwakgi gugrerro oddigi mapol mada i wii yat kenyo 	the weaver birds have built many of their nests on that tree there
mic pa gwiny opuk tek mada me yabbone 	closed anus of a tortoise is very difficult to open 
Pien bedo yot bot kinaga me donyo ki i waŋ libira, kato lalonyo me donyo i ker pa Lubaŋa.” 	Indeed, it is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle than for someone who is rich to enter the kingdom of God.”
Doŋ aŋa mono ma neno in macalo dano mapat ki jo mukene? Gin aŋo ma itye kwede ma pe gimii amiya? Ka gimii amiya, piŋo iwakke kwede kumeno calo pe gimii amiya nono? 	For who makes you different from anyone else? What do you have that you did not receive? And if you did receive it, why do you boast as though you did not?
Dano guuro kit pwonnye matek, pien owonyogi macalo won twero, pe macalo lipwony-cik.	The people were amazed at his teaching, because he taught them as one who had authority, not as the teachers of the law.
Ka gin ducu cwinygi odoko tek ci gucamo cam pigi kengi. 	They were all encouraged and ate some food themselves.
ocubbo ni muut 	he pierced it deeply
Jo ma yam en oŋeyogi con, omoko bene ni myero gunywak cal pa Wode, wek omi Wode obed latin kayo i kin utmego mapol. 	And we know that in all things God works for the good of those who love him, who have been called according to his purpose.
winynye niya ni bibinno diki 	it is being rumoured that perhaps she might come tomorrow 
Ento doŋ atyeko coyo botwu lok mogo ki tekcwiny madit, kombeddi amito apo wiwu iye. Atimo meno pi mot ma Lubaŋa omiya, 	I myself am convinced, my brothers and sisters, that you yourselves are full of goodness, filled with knowledge and competent to instruct one another.
gin labit rec en aye otwol kot 	a bait for fish is an earthworm
me abic onik, me abicel karnelian, me abiro kuricolit, me aboro berul, me aboŋwen topaj, me apar kuricoparac, me apar wiye acel jacint, me apar wiye aryo ameticito. 	the fifth onyx, the sixth ruby, the seventh chrysolite, the eighth beryl, the ninth topaz, the tenth turquoise, the eleventh jacinth, and the twelfth amethyst.
Ka guo i Jerucalem, lwak muye Kricito, kacel ki lukwena ki ludoŋo, gujologi maber, ci gutuco gin ducu ma Lubaŋa obedo ka tiyone kwedgi. 	When they came to Jerusalem, they were welcomed by the church and the apostles and elders, to whom they reported everything God had done through them.
Remo pa Kricito pe kato maca mada? Pi Cwiny Maleŋ ma bedo matwal, omiyo en omine kene bot Lubaŋa kun roc mo pe i kome, pi lonyo cwinywu ma onoŋo ocido woko macol licuc pi tiyo tic ma kwo pe iye, wek wubed ma iwu leŋ, ka doŋ wawor Lubaŋa makwo. 	How much more, then, will the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered himself unblemished to God, cleanse our consciences from acts that lead to death, so that we may serve the living God!
en odok ning ning i kom lok ma in ipenynye iye? 	how did he reply to what you asked him? 
moko man tikka twerro nudde me nyuka? 	can this flour be stirred or made into gruel? 
muni otara gin aye gukeliwa pekko 	the white people are the ones who brought us trouble 
gin myero gubed i te loc, macalo cik pa Lujudaya bene oloko. 	They are not allowed to speak, but must be in submission, as the law says.
wan adii ma watye kany 	how many of us are here? 
kun giwaco ni, “Ka in i Kabaka pa Lujudaya, larre keni!” 	and said, “If you are the king of the Jews, save yourself.”
Ka dwan man doŋ oloko, ci ginoŋo Yecu odoŋ kene. Lupwonnye guliŋ aliŋa	When the voice had spoken, they found that Jesus was alone
akwerro lokke woko	I rejected his words
Yecu odokke iye ni, “In lapwony pa Icrael, pe iŋeyo lok man? 	“How can this be?” Nicodemus asked.
en aye obedo ŋat mukwoŋo ye Kricito i Acia. 	Greet also the church that meets at their house
lyello wic 	shaving the hair 
Doŋ ka onoŋo pe tye ŋat mo ma gonyo, ci myero dano ma mito lok i leb mapatpat oliŋ aliŋa i cokke pa jo muye Kricito, en olok kekene ki Lubaŋa. 	If there is no interpreter, the speaker should keep quiet in the church and speak to himself and to God.
lacan ma kwo pe gero minne	a poor man as long as he lives does not sleep with his mother
Ento dano ma kalo akala i cwinye kop loye ka ce ocamo, pien gin ma en timo-ni noŋo pe oa i niye, pien gin ducu ma pe oa i niye meno bal.	It is better not to eat meat or drink wine or to do anything else that will cause your brother or sister to fall.
kombeddi doŋ acuŋ kany pi miyo caden bot jo matino ki bot ludito. Lok ma aloko en gin ma lunebi wa ki Moses bene guwaco ni bitimme keken, pe lok mo mapat, 	I am saying nothing beyond what the prophets and Moses said would happen—
wun wubinene ki kunnu. Nen, doŋ atyeko tito botwu.” 	Then go quickly and tell his disciples: ‘He has risen from the dead and is going ahead of you into Galilee
Yecu owaco botgi ni, “Wubino bota ki pala lucwan ki odoo-gu me maka, macalo wubino i kom layak mo? 	“Am I leading a rebellion,” said Jesus, “that you have come out with swords and clubs to capture me?
latin ojony ma gwinynye ducu dong oruggo bel 	the child is so much wasted that his her buttocks are wrinkled
aecitto ka ryeene wek alim yamo ma mit 	I am going to walk in order to stretch my legs and get some fresh air
odaa none labongo tyen lok me 	he quarrelled for nothing, without any reason 
citto ka rweene i cuk	taking a walk to the market  
Ka gin magi ocako timme, myero wunen malo, myero wutiŋ wiwu malo, pien kare me kokowu doŋ onyiko cok.” 	When these things begin to take place, stand up and lift up your heads, because your redemption is drawing near.”
doggolane twerro pungge maber 	the door can be closed very well 
Ka Jekaria onene, ci cwinye opoto, lworo omake. 	When Zechariah saw him, he was startled and was gripped with fear.
latin tye ka tukko i daba caa koni bongone jotte ki daba mape twerre 	the child is playing in the mud there, he will come with his clothes badly smeared with mud, in other words full of mud
gang maditto ducu dong pe tye apero pien gigoyo eel rummogi woko 	there are no open big houses, because all of them have fences constructed around them
kella lakologoc me tokko cam	bring for me a spoon for serving the food
oyeg yeg otimme i Toro ma oturro odi madowong mada kuno 	the earthquake took place in Toro and caused breaking up of many houses there
laber ume ngwe	the nose of the beautiful one smells
labbo dek 	taking a large amount of sauce 
Ento Petero oile malo, kun waco ni, “A malo icuŋ	But Peter made him get up
Pi meno an bene atemo mada kare ducu wek abed ma cwinya leŋ i nyim Lubaŋa ki i nyim dano. 	So I strive always to keep my conscience clear before God and man.
Ento myero koŋ okany can madwoŋ, kun yalwak me kare man gikwere. 	But first he must suffer many things and be rejected by this generation.
gimaarro nekko gweno layer me kwer 	the chicken with feathers on the legs are ones which are usually slaughtered for traditional sacrifice 
lug pa gotte tuut mada 	the slope of the hill is very deep 
pien awaco botwu ni, pe dok abicamo nio ka ocobo kakare i ker pa Lubaŋa.” 	For I tell you, I will not eat it again until it finds fulfillment in the kingdom of God.”
otit meny dyewor 	the firefly glimmers at night
Obala dano ma tallo dano 	Obala is a man who charms or casts spell on people 
Ento Lacamaria mo ma onoŋo bene tye ka wot i yo-nu, oo ka ma en tye iye. Ka onene, kica omake i kome. 	But a Samaritan, as he traveled, came where the man was; and when he saw him, he took pity on him.
kella tep amitto pimmo ki bor pa pall meera 	bring tape measure because I want to measure the length of my pair of trousers
cun yam tude?	can you tie two penises in a knot
gimakko larok moni kany matye ka rotto piny 	an enemy has been arrested here who was spying 
nino me ceer pa yecu 	stir or spread the millet so that it may dry well
Oto en aye okello anyubba nyubba i paco man 	Oto is the one who brought the confusion in this home
temmo motoka ka cakke 	testing the car if it can start
ogera dwong mada i bona kany 	the grivet monkeys are very many in this forest
ka kica pa Rwotwa omedde twatwal i koma kacel ki niye ki mar ma tye i Kricito Yecu. 	Even though I was once a blasphemer and a persecutor and a violent man, I was shown mercy because I acted in ignorance and unbelief.
lok man dong dwokowa odye mada 	this matter now takes us back to to start all over again
Ka nino okato manok, Yecu dok odwogo i Kapernaum, ci pire owinnye ni en tye paco. 	A few days later, when Jesus again entered Capernaum, the people heard that he had come home.
aona opiyo ki twoo jonynyo gin aye gimiyo dano jony mada 	tuberculosis and AIDS are the diseases that cause much wasting
reeno dong ki rangi ma ocwak ocwak 	painting the lips with yellow colour
I kare ma gikato woko, lwak gulego ni lok man myero gitit botgi odoco i cabit ma bino. 	As Paul and Barnabas were leaving the synagogue, the people invited them to speak further about these things on the next Sabbath.
Winy ba, ibiliŋ ma pe itwero lok, nio i nino meno ma lok man bitimme iye, pien pe iye lokka, ma bicobbe ka kare oromo.” 	And now you will be silent and not able to speak until the day this happens, because you did not believe my words, which will come true at their appointed time.”
matto jai 	smoking bhang 
ci waoro botwu Temceo, ma en ominwa ki latic pa Lubaŋa i tito lok me kwena maber i kom Kricito, wek ojiŋ cwinywu obed tek dok odi cwinywu i kom niyewu, 	We sent Timothy, who is our brother and co-worker in God’s service in spreading the gospel of Christ, to strengthen and encourage you in your faith,
Meno gin mumiyo amito twatwal ni myero acwale botwu wek wubed ki yomcwiny ka dok wunene, ki an bene pe doŋ myero abed ki cwercwiny madwoŋ. 	For he longs for all of you and is distressed because you heard he was ill.
Ka doŋ gukatti woko i wi tera, guneno mac miri kunnu, ma giketo rec i wiye, ki mugati. 	The other disciples followed in the boat, towing the net full of fish, for they were not far from shore, about a hundred yards.
dano guguure madowong mada i bar odilo ka kwerro nino me Loc Ken  	people have assembled in large numbers to celebrate the Independence Day
Yecu owaco botgi ni, “Wun lumiŋ, ki luwackom i cwinywu pi ye lok ducu ma lunebi yam guloko! 	They came and told us that they had seen a vision of angels, who said he was alive.
pien Lubaŋa gire pe leŋŋe tuŋ bot dano mo pi kit ma en tye kwede. 	There will be trouble and distress for every human being who does evil: first for the Jew, then for the Gentile;
pe icaane ni in pe irommo tic monni 	don't despise yourself that you are not fit for a certain job
i kare ma anenni ka itemmo riggo ki leela anyerri mada 	when I saw you trying to ride a bicycle, I laughed at you very much
Pien pe atiyo gin maber ma amito-ni, ento gin marac ma pe amito-ni aye dok atiyo. 	As it is, it is no longer I myself who do it, but it is sin living in me.
Pe otimme pi ticwu mo, mumiyo ŋat mo owek wakke pire. 	in order that in the coming ages he might show the incomparable riches of his grace, expressed in his kindness to us in Christ Jesus.
ruyo lok	to talk too fast
Oneno lumalaika aryo ma rukgi tar, kun gubedo ka ma gipyelo kom Yecu iye, acel tuŋ wiye, acel tuŋ tyene. 	As she wept, she bent over to look into the tomb
latin man doki lagiggi twatwal 	this child is very peevish or petulant 
gony omakko min otwa tin ki dyer wor 	my wife suddenly delivered last night
Otiŋo piwa lalar matek i ot pa laticce Daudi, 	He has raised up a horn of salvation for us in the house of his servant David
Ento pe kit meno botwu	But you are not to be like that
nyuka man liyo twatwal 	the porridge is too watery 
tyello dano ma onongo tye ki pekko 	to support somebody who has problems
awobe tin gucitto ka dwar 	the boys today went to hunt or the boys went hunting today
kel yat ma apadda me paddo lobo 	bring the flat wood for moulding the clay
ki mukene ducu mapol  	and many others
gweni man gitye ka caddo twatwal, ryemgi gucit gucad woko kwica 	these chicken are having diarrhoea chase them out to go and pass their loose stool outside there
Gubino i lobo pa Lugeraca, ma okemme ki Galilaya. 	They sailed to the region of the Gerasenes, which is across the lake from Galilee.
twoo ne cakke ki arem madit ka lacen tut i yoo me lac ma iwinynyo ka itye ka lac 	the disease starts with a severe pain and later pus in the urinary tract, which you feel when passing urine 
komme dong ongil woko ki koyo	he is now used to or acclimatised to the cold
aryo tyen aryo dokko agwen 	lit two times two becomes four
nyeb litino ki tukko odillo ci gibimaarro tukko odilo	interest the children in playing football and in future they will love playing it
atabo lobo too oyot mada ka opotto piny 	the earthen bowl breaks easily when it falls down
ci Woru ma neni i muŋ-ŋi bimiyi bakacic. 	But when you pray, go into your room, close the door and pray to your Father, who is unseen
wacittu paco ka larro lokke 	let us go home to discuss the matter 
nywak ki latinni kacel kace iecitto Kampala 	go together with this child if you are going to Kampala or go with your child if you are going to Kampala
Gucako pennye kekengi ni, “Aŋa mono ma bidirowa got woko cen ki i dog lyel?” 	and they asked each other, “Who will roll the stone away from the entrance of the tomb?”
kama dano mutoo ducu giyikko iye	where the bodies of the dead people are buried 
Dok i yo acel-lu, Moses okiro remo i kom kema ki jami ducu ma gitiyo kwedgi me woro Lubaŋa. 	In the same way, he sprinkled with the blood both the tabernacle and everything used in its ceremonies.
ger oddi kany 	build your house here or build houses here
Ka ŋatti mo tye ki it me winyone, owiny.” 	If anyone has ears to hear, let them hear.”
En Maliam ma yam owiro Rwot ki moo, dok ojwayo tyene ki yer wiye, aye ominne kome lit-ti. 	He did not need any testimony about mankind, for he knew what was in each person.
Ocito oporo lok ki ajwagi madito pa Lubaŋa ki ludito askari me ot pa Lubaŋa, kit ma myero emiye kwede botgi. 	And Judas went to the chief priests and the officers of the temple guard and discussed with them how he might betray Jesus.
rod buk man i wii lawotte 	pile this book on top of the others 
goyo tanga i wii lee i nyim abila	blessing the action of killing the animals
peny madit en aye bibedo me donynyo i yunibacity 	the important examination will be the one for entering the University
“Dok bene yam wuwinyo lok ma onoŋo giwaco bot jo macon ni, Pe ikwoŋ kwoŋ goba, ento cob kwoŋŋi ducu bot Rwot. 	“Again, you have heard that it was said to the people long ago, ‘Do not break your oath, but fulfill to the Lord the vows you have made.’
wekke ocitti 	let him go
lacoo ma kitte rac kit meno twerro tenynye 	such a bad husband can be abandoned
ladit monni ma lokkoni myero obed ni tye ka lok maber mada, ma miyo dano konni ni rap rap ki cinggi 	the big man who is speaking must be saying very good words which make the people clap their hands frequently
pe pi rok meno keken, ento wek ocok litino pa Lubaŋa ma guket ata, gubed acel. 	You do not realize that it is better for you that one man die for the people than that the whole nation perish.”
Ka lwak guwinyo, ci guuro pwonye matek. 	‘I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob’? He is not the God of the dead but of the living.”
litino matino gimmo jami agimma	the very young children bite with the points of their teeth
tud tol kany 	knot the string here 
nio waŋ ma dano guyeto Lubaŋa pi gemo man me pee-ni, pien gemo meno onoŋo obedo rac ma okato kare.	And they cursed God on account of the plague of hail, because the plague was so terrible.
Po wigi ducu me mine kengi i te loc pa luloc, ki wegi twer, me bedo ki winy, ki me yubbe pi tiyo tic mo maber ducu. 	They are detestable, disobedient and unfit for doing anything good.
I ŋe meno kabaka ki laloyo ki Bernike ki jo ma gubedo kwedgi gua malo. 	The king rose, and with him the governor and Bernice and those sitting with them.
pii tye ka mol citto piny i ora kwica 	the water is running down the valley
man lakwaa Okot 	this is Okot's grandchild 
danone maaro rwacce mada ka tye ka wot 	he always falls when walking
awinynyo gin mo timme ni pung pung myerro obed it lyec matye kangoone kit meno 	I hear deep flapping noises, it must be an elephant's ears which are flapping and making the noises 
pim maber ka wek icel	aiming to shoot the guns
Gin ma miyo kwo en aye cwiny, kom pe konyo gin mo	Then what if you see the Son of Man ascend to where he was before!
kongo lacoi gionynyo i agulu acel ka dong dano acel acel rwakko iye ocekene ka cwiyo kwede 	the lacoi beer is poured into one pot, into which each person inserts his tube straw and then sucks 
Ento pe guketo cwinygi iye, gucito citogi, ŋat acel ocito i potone, ŋat mukene ocito i cato wille, 	Come to the wedding banquet.’
Akemo pa Lubaŋa bino pi kit tim macalo meno i kom jo pe winyo lokke. 	Put to death, therefore, whatever belongs to your earthly nature: sexual immorality, impurity, lust, evil desires and greed, which is idolatry.
dano pud dong guol woko ki tic, mitto dano mo ma nuggo lok obin, wek dok oyom ii dano 	the people are tired of work, some entertainer or a joker should come to entertain us with humorous talk
bongone nwang 	the cloth is of good material and is quite rough
Gibiwaco botwu ni, ‘Nen, en ene!’ nyo ni, ‘Nen, en ca!’ Pe wucit iye, pe wulubgi. 	People will tell you, ‘There he is!’ or ‘Here he is!’ Do not go running off after them.
Pien wan watye ki kodi gen man, en mumiyo waloko ki tekcwiny. 	And if what was transitory came with glory, how much greater is the glory of that which lasts!
Ci anoŋo ni gidote ki adot ma dok i kom cikgi, pe onoŋo tye lok mo ma romo ŋolo kop me to iye i kome, kadi mabuc bene. 	I found that the accusation had to do with questions about their law, but there was no charge against him that deserved death or imprisonment.
pany cinge dit mada 	his palm is very big
jammi me awukka wii odur dwog i ot kany 	there are many things in the house here, which need to be poured into the rubbish heap
makko jami anyedda 	holds things with disdain 
gitye kacokke kwene? 	where are they gathering or assembling? 
corro lok 	to let out the secret 
nio waŋ ma wan ducu wadoko acel i niyewa ki i ŋeyo Wod pa Lubaŋa, nio ka wadoko dano mucwiny, ma wadoŋo warom ki Kricito, ma en aye jami ducu opoŋ iye.	to equip his people for works of service, so that the body of Christ may be built up
gitwerro geggo nyal makko nyonyo ka giwirro kom gi ki moo me nyonyo 	metals can be prevented from being rusty if they are smeared with grease
litino gucitto ka kwinynyo oceyo i dong kulo 	the children went to dig up oceyo from the river bank 
Jo meno girom ki Yane ki Yambure ma yam gupyem ki Moses, pien gin bene gitye ka pyem ki lok ada i kit acel-lu	always learning but never able to come to a knowledge of the truth.
Ci pire oywek oromo kabedo ducu murumo lobo Galilaya. 	News about him spread quickly over the whole region of Galilee.
Gin guliŋ aliŋa, pien gubedo ka laro lok kekengi i waŋayo ni, “Aŋa ma ladit i kingi?” 	But they kept quiet because on the way they had argued about who was the greatest.
guwotto nene wa Atiak	they went as far as Atiak
Yecu odokke iye ni, “Cimon, atye ki lok mo ma amito awacci.” Cimon ogamo ni, “Wacca, Lapwony.” 	Jesus answered him, “Simon, I have something to tell you.” “Tell me, teacher,” he said.
En obino kany bene ki twero pa ajwagi madito me tweyo jo ducu ma gilwoŋo nyiŋi.” 	And he has come here with authority from the chief priests to arrest all who call on your name.”
nyaanne dong opong  	the girl is now fully grown up and mature
Lacan myero owakke ka gitiŋe malo, 	Believers in humble circumstances ought to take pride in their high position.
yee pii i cupuria iteer gang 	carry the water in the aluminium saucepan on your head and take it home 
waar man aye poore ki tyenne 	these are the shoes that fit him
I cawa meno Yecu obedo ki yomcwiny i Cwiny Maleŋ kun waco ni, “Apwoyi, Wora, in Rwot me polo ki me lobo, pien ikano lok magi woko ki bot luryeko ki luŋe-piny, ci inyutogi bot litino lukere	At that time Jesus, full of joy through the Holy Spirit, said, “I praise you, Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because you have hidden these things from the wise and learned, and revealed them to little children
Juda wod pa Yakobo, ki Juda me Keriot, ma yam olokke odobe. 	Judas son of James, and Judas Iscariot, who became a traitor.
ngeyo tukko me rette mada 	he knows very well the game of wrestling 
Wun lutowaŋ! Gin mene madit makato, mot nyo keno tyer ma miyo mot doko maleŋ? 	You also say, ‘If anyone swears by the altar, it means nothing; but anyone who swears by the gift on the altar is bound by that oath.’
anyogi ne dong otwoo woko pe twerro mwodde 	the maize is now dried and cannot be eaten
atye ki can me cam ento palaa aye anok kwedde mada 	I have plates for eating but I do not have enough table knives
ki i care kama coron pe iye dano, gicitto gikonynye iye, ci meno dong callo gionynyo iye gin mayubbo ngom maber me pitto gin acamma iye 	in the rural area where there are no latrines, the people pass their stools there and these are like fertilisers which have been put there which make the field very good for growing crops
cukane twerro pette i wii kitanda 	the sheet can be spread on the bed
tin gigonno mada	today he was told off and booed very much
Pi niye omiyo en obedo macalo welo i lobo ma yam Lubaŋa ociko pire, macalo ebedo i lobo pa lurok, kun bedo i kema gin ki Icaka ka Yakobo, ma gin bene gimiyogi kit cikke acel-lu. 	By faith he made his home in the promised land like a stranger in a foreign country; he lived in tents, as did Isaac and Jacob, who were heirs with him of the same promise.
“Ento ka kare ma giciko onyiko cok, ma yam Lubaŋa omiyo bot Abraim, ci dano gumedde ki nya i Ejipt, 	“As the time drew near for God to fulfill his promise to Abraham, the number of our people in Egypt had greatly increased.
punno lawotti pe ber	cheating your friend is not good 
pien nakanen pe guniaŋ lok ma i kom mugati, ento cwinygi pud obedo nwaŋ. 	for they had not understood about the loaves; their hearts were hardened.
luditto gitye ka matto ting i ot kwica 	the elders are sucking the beer from the dregs in the house
cit ka jollo pii ma mol ki i wii ot 	go to collect the water that is flowing from the roof of the house
Yecu olwoŋo lwak bote, ci owaco botgi ni, “Wuwiny lokka, ci wuniaŋ iye. 	They worship me in vain; their teachings are merely human rules.’”
“Ladit, tin koma gum mada me cuŋ i nyimi, in Kabaka Agripa, pi pido lokka i kom kop ducu ma Lujudaya gudota iye. 	“King Agrippa, I consider myself fortunate to stand before you today as I make my defense against all the accusations of the Jews,
latinne pud twerro tirre	the child can still be changed
kacokke madit 	a big assembly 
lwak jami ma gitorro i wii motoka Lori dong onurro woko pe tweerro ngwec 	lots of things that have been piled on the lorry have weighed it down and it cannot move 
nio kwede wa i nino ma gitere kwede i polo, i ŋe miyo cik i tek pa Cwiny Maleŋ bot lukwenane ma yam oyerogi. 	until the day he was taken up to heaven, after giving instructions through the Holy Spirit to the apostles he had chosen.
Gucako mako dano mo ma onoŋo obekato mua ki i kin gaŋ ci gudiye ka tiŋo yatariya pa Yecu, nyiŋe Cimon dano me Cirene, ma won Alegijanda ki Rupo. 	A certain man from Cyrene, Simon, the father of Alexander and Rufus, was passing by on his way in from the country, and they forced him to carry the cross.
Lok man owinynye bot jo muye Kricito ma i Jerucalem, ci gucwalo Barnaba i Antiokia. 	News of this reached the church in Jerusalem, and they sent Barnabas to Antioch.
pien gin ducu gitiyo kit tic acel, ci gucako tic, pien gin lutim kema. 	and because he was a tentmaker as they were, he stayed and worked with them.
I waraga ma giketo ka wiye, gicoyo nukuta me leb Grik, ki me leb Roma, ki me leb Ibru ni, “Man aye Kabaka pa Lujudaya.” 	There was a written notice above him, which read: this is the king of the jews.
Petero ocako niaŋ pire kene kun waco ni, “Doŋ atyeko niaŋ kombeddi ni Rwot ocwalo lamalaikane olara woko ki i ciŋ Kerode ki i kom gin ducu ma Lujudaya gigeno ni bitimme i koma-ni.” 	Then Peter came to himself and said, “Now I know without a doubt that the Lord has sent his angel and rescued me from Herod’s clutches and from everything the Jewish people were hoping would happen.”
Latin man dok odal um maarro pong mada i umme 	this child's nose is always full of mucus and crusts 
canggo ogit git en aye me gaddo ne woko 	curing of the hangnail is to cut it off
Jo mapol ma gubedo jo mukwoŋo yo gibidoŋ cen, ki jo ma gudoŋ cen gibibedo jo mukwoŋo.	But many who are first will be last, and many who are last will be first.
“Wuwac bot jo Cion ni, Nen ka kabakawu bino botwu, kun obedo i wi kana ki mwolo, i wi latin kana.” 	This took place to fulfill what was spoken through the prophet:
lok mandarane tege, pien dero ceng ma aa iye carro wang 	turn the mirror away because the sun's rays reflected by it dazzles the eyes 
Aŋa i kinwu ma won latin, ka latinne olege ni omiye rec, ci bimiye twol ma ka rec? 	“Which of you fathers, if your son asks for a fish, will give him a snake instead?
Wucat jamiwu, wukony ki lucan	Sell your possessions and give to the poor
ngat ma ryek 	a person one who is wise
labumma nino ducu mere potto i can	a swindler is always in trouble
Doŋ ka komi kulu bedo i leŋo, kun colpiny pe iye, ci komi kulu bibedo leŋ, macalo tara ma menyi ki derone ka tye ka lyel.” 	Therefore, if your whole body is full of light, and no part of it dark, it will be just as full of light as when a lamp shines its light on you.”
kelwa lok ma en olokko me caden meere 	bring to us what he said as evidence of his testimony
parro mada pi rwenyno latinne 	mourning very much the loss of his child
yaar bonggi ma gilwokko woko wii mwodo wek otwoo iye 	spread the clothes that have been washed outside on the grass to dry there
pii ne lyet mada, wek kong acom ki pii magic ka wek dong i lwokke kwedde	the water is too hot let me pour cold water into it in order that you may wash bathe with it
lakke rem mada 	he is having very bad toothache or his tooth is aching very much
En riŋo woko pien tiyo pi mucara keken, pe paro pi romi. 	They will come in and go out, and find pasture.
pien in ibibedo cadenne bot dano ducu pi gin ma ineno ki ma iwinyo. 	You will be his witness to all people of what you have seen and heard.
lok geddo pa jooni dong otirri woko 	the matter concerning the building of those people's house, for the time being, has been put into cold storage
komme wac pe tye ki gubu pe twerro tiyo tic mo 	he is very lazy he has no strength he cannot do anything
otit bene twerro cweene me kicaa cing ma becco mada 	the palm can also be made into very beautiful handbags
lok ma kiteno twerro cibbe i nyim luditto 	such matter can be placed before the elders  
lacoc ocitto ka coyo kal i poto  	a sower went to sow the millet in the field
Bedo gin me lworo twatwal me poto i ciŋ Lubaŋa makwo. 	It is a dreadful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.
doŋ lok macalo meno a iye nyeko, pyem, yet ki par maraco ma miyo gen rwenyo woko i kin dano. 	they are conceited and understand nothing
Lunebi mapol ma lugoba bibino ma gibirwenyo jo mapol. 	and many false prophets will appear and deceive many people.
twoor but ot kama pe atir wek oo piny 	knock down the wall which is not straight 
wallo bongo woke ki i komme	takes off part of the clothes from his her body
meyo mac ki yen matino	keeping the fire burning by putting small pieces of wood into the fire 
latinne pe ngeyo nanggo nyuka ki cinge maber	his child does not know how to scoop with his fingers and lick the porridge
Yecu owacce ni, “Adada awacci ni, tin ki i dyewor, ma noŋo twon gweno peya onwoyo koko kiryo, noŋo in doŋ ityeko kwera woko tyen adek kulu.” 	“Truly I tell you,” Jesus answered, “today—yes, tonight—before the rooster crows twice you yourself will disown me three times.”
pimmo kare maber me timmo gin mo	to wait for the right time to do something
cam man dong okwok woko 	this food has gone bad and is smelling  
tucco gin ma dano moo otiyo pe ber	to betray somebody of what he has done is not good
man merre lawoko pe beddo i ot nino ducu tye merre ka wot keken 	this is an outsider, does not stay in the house, always roaming about
Kit macalo doŋ watye ki ajwaka madit ma loyo ot pa Lubaŋa, 	and since we have a great priest over the house of God,
cun nyako maca pien ber mada 	court that girl because she is very beautiful 
Aŋa i kinwu ma twero medo mwaka acel i kom kwone pi bedo ki tam mapol? 	Who of you by worrying can add a single hour to your life?
Ka lumony guŋolo tol yeya, guweko yeya okwaŋ ocito. 	So the soldiers cut the ropes that held the lifeboat and let it drift away.
Abimii layab me ker me polo, doŋ gin ducu ma in itweyo i wi lobo man gibitweyo bene wa i polo, dok gin ducu ma igonyo i wi lobo man gibigonyo bene wa i polo.” 	I will give you the keys of the kingdom of heaven; whatever you bind on earth will be bound in heaven, and whatever you loose on earth will be loosed in heaven.”
tebo maarro nen ki dyewor ka tye ka wot i yoo yenynyo oyoo ki lagwee 	the night jar is often seen at night walking along the road or path looking for rats and lizards
Doŋ bot jo ma tye ka rwenyo, ŋwecwa obedo gin muto ma kelo to	But thanks be to God, who always leads us as captives in Christ’s triumphal procession and uses us to spread the aroma of the knowledge of him everywhere.
geya ojim mada i poto . 	the sorghum has grown very close in the field
Pi meno, kit macalo bal yam obino i lobo kun wok ki i dano acel, ka doŋ to obino pi bal, kit meno bene to onya oromo kin dano ducu, pien dano ducu gubalo. 	Not only is this so, but we also boast in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom we have now received reconciliation.
gwerre gin maber mada 	vaccination is a very good thing
Pi meno atitti ni, doŋ giweko balle mapol-gu ducu, kit ma marre madwoŋ-ŋi nyuto-ni	Therefore, I tell you, her many sins have been forgiven—as her great love has shown
pien pire Lujudaya mapol gua woko ki botgi, guye Yecu. 	So the chief priests made plans to kill Lazarus as well,
ŋat ma ite tye me winyo lok man myero owiny. 	Whoever has ears, let them hear.
Ka meno otum, Paulo oa ki i Atene, ocito Korint. 	After this, Paul left Athens and went to Corinth.
gangge tye kwene? 	where is his home? 
ka icitto i ngangge inonggo en tye ka cwec keken pien en cweyo mukekeka mada ' 	when you go to his home, you will find him all the time knitting, because he knits mats   
Nino madito me Kato (Paska) ki me Mugati ma Tobi Pe Iye onoŋo odoŋ nino aryo, ajwagi madito pa Lubaŋa ki lupwony-cik guporo lok me mako Yecu ki ryeko ka wek gineke. 	Now the Passover and the Festival of Unleavened Bread were only two days away, and the chief priests and the teachers of the law were scheming to arrest Jesus secretly and kill him.
notto agulu mapud dyak ma gitye ka cweyone	to dent the wet pot which is being made with a pattern 
Ŋat ma oloko kweda-ni onoŋo tye ki odoo lagada jabu me pimo gaŋ ki dogcel ki cel kikome. 	The angel who talked with me had a measuring rod of gold to measure the city, its gates and its walls.
Ento en odok iye botgi ni, ‘Ada awaco botwu ni, an gira pe aŋeyowu.’ 	“But he replied, ‘Truly I tell you, I don’t know you.’
Lapwony-cik ogamo ni, “Iloko kakare, Lapwony	“Well said, teacher,” the man replied
Yecu odokke iye ni, “Wubineno can, wun lupwony-cik bene! Pien wumiyo dano yeyo yec mapek, ma yeyone tek, kun wun kikomwu pe wugudo kadi ki lwet ciŋwu acel. 	“Woe to you, because you build tombs for the prophets, and it was your ancestors who killed them.
kom ot twerro pamme maber mada 	the wall of this house can be well plastered 
Owaco botgi ni, “Yam tye laŋolkop i gaŋ mo, ma pe lworo Lubaŋa kadi woro dano. 	He said: “In a certain town there was a judge who neither feared God nor cared what people thought.
Tam ma lubo kit pa dano kelo to, ento tam ma lubo kit pa dano kelo to, ento tam ma lubo kit pa Cwiny Maleŋ miyo kwo ki kuc. 	in order that the righteous requirement of the law might be fully met in us, who do not live according to the flesh but according to the Spirit.
en twerro citto ka cam ka dong otyekko ticce 	he can go to eat when he has finished his work
Yacon aye ojologi	and Jason has welcomed them into his house
Gugamo ni, “Pe walimo waraga ma oa ki i Jerucalem ma loko komi, pe tye ŋat mo i kin omegiwa mua kunnu ma okelo lok mo i komi, nyo ma oloko lok mo marac i komi. 	They replied, “We have not received any letters from Judea concerning you, and none of our people who have come from there has reported or said anything bad about you.
umme tye ka cweer remo	he is bleeding from the nose 
Magi gin aye gin ma yam Enoka, ma obedo dano me abiro nia i kom Adam, yam otito pire macalo lanebi ni, “Wunen, Rwot bibino ki lwak jone maleŋ mapol ata, 	They are clouds without rain, blown along by the wind; autumn trees, without fruit and uprooted—twice dead.
ywee wek cwinynyi kong opyee 	rest until you have composed yourself
Onoŋo pol dano gia ki i Jerucalem, ki lobo Judaya ducu, ki lobo ducu ma tye cok ki Jordan, gimol gibino bote. 	This is he who was spoken of through the prophet Isaiah: “A voice of one calling in the wilderness, ‘Prepare the way for the Lord, make straight paths for him.’”
rwat wunu kom ot ma gitaddoni tin 	plaster with mud today the house that has been fabricated
layata opuri woko  	the potatoes have grown mouldy and rotten
dano twero twoorre kwede ki dye wor 	people can knock themselves against it at night
kella gipinynya kany 	bring me all my belongings here 
Kato (Paska) pa Lujudaya onoŋo doŋ tye cok. Jo mapol gia ki i kin pacci gicito Jerucalem ma peya Kato (Paska) oromo, wek gilonnye kengi. 	Instead he withdrew to a region near the wilderness, to a village called Ephraim, where he stayed with his disciples.
pig tyang en aye giyubbo me beddo cukari tyang en aye ginoggo iye cukari madowong ni katto gin mukene ducu 	from the juice of sugarcane, sugar is made it is from the juice of sugarcane that a lot of sugar is obtained than from other sources 
bao ne tye ka gang woko, ka wubeddo ka wekko meja i ceng ci gang woko 	if you go on leaving the table in the sun, it cracks 
nyibbo get bongo ma pe tye atir 	cutting off the edge of the cloth which is not straight
Bot Lurok ma pe i te cik pa Moses abedo macalo ŋat ma pe i te cik, kun noŋo pe atye laboŋo cik pa Lubaŋa, ento abedo i te cik pa Kricito. 	To those not having the law I became like one not having the law (though I am not free from God’s law but am under Christ’s law), so as to win those not having the law.
Copater wod pa Piro olwoke, kacel ki Lutecalonika Aristako ki Cekundo, ki Gayo Laderube, ki Temceo, kacel ki jo Acia, Tukiko ki Tropimo. 	He was accompanied by Sopater son of Pyrrhus from Berea, Aristarchus and Secundus from Thessalonica, Gaius from Derbe, Timothy also, and Tychicus and Trophimus from the province of Asia.
dakone pe nywal 	his wife is barren
Pien kwo pire tek kato cam, kom pire tek kato ginaruka. 	For life is more than food, and the body more than clothes.
‘Wakwo i en, wawoto i en, wabedo i en’, macalo ŋat mo ocoyo. Ŋat acel i kin lucocwu bene ocoyo ni, ‘Wan bene wan litinone.’ 	‘For in him we live and move and have our being.’ As some of your own poets have said, ‘We are his offspring.’
dano mapol mada i karre man tye ma manno lim ma gimiyo botgi me tic pi lwak 	there are a number of people who take the money for themselves, which are given to them for public work 
lokke atir mada	his story is quite right 
bor pa bongone twerro poorre ka romme 	the length of the dress can be tried if it fits him 
Pi man Lujudaya gupenye ni, “Lanyut aŋo ma inyuttiwa ma omiyo itiyo jami magi?” 	His disciples remembered that it is written: “Zeal for your house will consume me.”
miyo ryekogi dwogo, ci gibwot ki i owic pa Catan ma onoŋo yam omakogi, omiyo gutiyo gin ma en mito.	Opponents must be gently instructed, in the hope that God will grant them repentance leading them to a knowledge of the truth,
komme gum pi weene woko oyot oyot kono tong ocubbe 	he was lucky to duck away quickly otherwise he would have been speared
mak matek, pien ka itimo kumeno, in kikomi ibilarre kacel ki jo ma winyi bene.	Watch your life and doctrine closely
cakke pe twerro luurre maber labongo moo wii cak me katto lye 	the milk cannot be poured without some cream passing through with it
akeyo litino woko ma ononggo gitye ka woo kany ki gwok ma acwallo i komgi	I scattered the children who were making a lot of noise here by setting the dog on them
olorro dong kabad me gicco li puk 	closed the door of the refrigerator tightly 
pien wun kikomwu doŋ wuŋeyo maber ni, nino pa Rwot bibino macalo lakwo ma bino i dyewor. 	for you know very well that the day of the Lord will come like a thief in the night.
dongge twerro genynye 	his mouth can be opened 
Nen, laco acel ki i kin lwak odaŋŋe ni, “Lapwony, abako doga boti, inen woda, pien anywalo en acel kene. 	A man in the crowd called out, “Teacher, I beg you to look at my son, for he is my only child.
gin me teddo ma obeddo callo kabad matye ki dongge ma giyabbo ka giketto iye gweno nyo ringo ka gilorro ka dong gicakko teddo iye 	it is a machine for cooking which is like a cupboard, it has a door which is opened and chicken or meat is put into and then roasted or baked
Pien wun ducu wutwero tito lok pa Lubaŋa kun wuleyo aleya, wek jo ducu gupwonnye, dok bene ocuk cwinygi. 	For you can all prophesy in turn so that everyone may be instructed and encouraged.
mul tee kitanda ki ciggi ka kalamme opotto lye kuno 	feel with your fingers under the bed to find out whether the pen has fallen and it is there
Wan ducu wapoto piny, ci awinyo dwan ma loko kweda i leb Ibru ni, ‘Caulo, Caulo, iyela piŋo? Itye ka keto ret i komi keni, macalo twon ka gweyo dim.’ 	We all fell to the ground, and I heard a voice saying to me in Aramaic, ‘Saul, Saul, why do you persecute me? It is hard for you to kick against the goads.’
tyang donggo mabecco mada i jwii dong kulu 	sugarcane grows very well in the wet, marshy ground near the river 
doggola candukke twerro pungge 	the lid of the box can be shut
Wun bene wubed jo ma menyo piny calo tara bot dano, wek gunen tic mabeco ma wutiyo ci gumi deyo bot Wonwu ma tye i polo. 	In the same way, let your light shine before others, that they may see your good deeds and glorify your Father in heaven.
Luparicayo mogo guwaco ni, “Dano man pe oa ki bot Lubaŋa, pien pe gwoko cabit.” Ento jo mukene guwaco ni, “Dano ma labalo twero tiyo lanyut ma rom man?” Omiyo apokapoka obedo i kingi. 	Now the day on which Jesus had made the mud and opened the man’s eyes was a Sabbath.
luyet dano, dok jo ma dag Lubaŋa. Gubedo luŋala, jo ma lyerre, jo ma wakke, lurot kit me timo tim maraco, jo ma pe winyo lunyodogi, 	Furthermore, just as they did not think it worthwhile to retain the knowledge of God, so God gave them over to a depraved mind, so that they do what ought not to be done.
latekke opotto woko i pii, lit 	his pipe has fallen into the water, but it means he is sexually impotent, that is, his penis cannot erect
En bidokke iye ki i ot ni, ‘Wek yela	And suppose the one inside answers, ‘Don’t bother me
pe icit ka robbo dogge  	do not go to provoke him
timmo abor gin marac ma kello adaga daga i kin dano	committing adultery is a very bad thing which brings enmity among the people
Wulub kit pa Lubaŋa, pien wun litinone ma en maro. 	In this way they will lay up treasure for themselves as a firm foundation for the coming age, so that they may take hold of the life that is truly life.
pe wugatwii litino woko ki i kom kwan 	do not turn away the children from their studies
gem pe miyi lonyo 	greed or stinginess does not make you rich 
maarro cammo mada pot dek ma numu	he loves very much to eat raw vegetables
Pien i kare meno twon can madit atika bitimme iye, ma yam peya onen i lobo, nia wa i acakki lobo nio kwede wa onyoo, dok pe bene binen. 	For then there will be great distress, unequaled from the beginning of the world until now—and never to be equaled again.
otwoo twatwal ma lebbe dong opuune woko ki gin matar 	he is so ill that his tongue is now furred puyo
mony cok ka potto i kin lobo caa 	the war is nearly breaking out between those countries 
ceng twoyo kal 	the sun dries the millet
gibole woko piny i ŋom kacel ki lumalaikane. 	He was hurled to the earth, and his angels with him.
Man aye lok me kwena ma yam wawinyo ki bote, ma watye ka titone botwu, ni, Lubaŋa en leŋo, dok i en pe tye ka mo macol kadi ki acel. 	This is the message we have heard from him and declare to you: God is light; in him there is no darkness at all.
jang yatte twerro nalle oo wa piny ma miyo dano rommo pwonno nyigge 	the branch of the tree can be bent down to enable people to pluck its seeds or fruits
Ci kapten obino bote openye ni, “In Laroma?” Ogamo ni, “Iyo.” 	The commander went to Paul and asked, “Tell me, are you a Roman citizen?” “Yes, I am,” he answered.
Aŋa i kin jo adek-ki ma itamo ni obedo lawot dano-nu ma orwatte ki luyak-ki?” 	“Which of these three do you think was a neighbor to the man who fell into the hands of robbers?”
gibitenye ata kun giweke doŋ munero, gibicamo riŋo kome ci giwaŋo woko ki mac. 	They will bring her to ruin and leave her naked; they will eat her flesh and burn her with fire.
tin gulwenynyo ma gunekke iye mada 	all these things can be destroyed
kwon twerro ranynye pi litino 	a big amount of kwon can be made for the children
wotto ma ganynye aganynya callo gin mo tye i kin emme 	walks waddling as though there is something between her thighs
Gipwo Luba?a Won Rwotwa Yecu Kricito! Pien pi kicane madit omiyo ginywalowa odoco wek wabed ki gen makwo pi cer pa Yecu Kricito ki i kin jo muto, 	who have been chosen according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, through the sanctifying work of the Spirit, to be obedient to Jesus Christ and sprinkled with his blood: Grace and peace be yours in abundance.
gwarro timmo gin mape ingeyo teerre, i kare mukene twerro bolli i can 	imitating to do something which you do not understand sometimes may throw you into trouble 
Ento wumar lukworwu, wutim ber, wumi banya, kun pe wugeno ni gibiculowu, ci mot me pwoyowu bibedo madwoŋ, dok wubibedo litino pa En Mamalo Twal	But love your enemies, do good to them, and lend to them without expecting to get anything back
Kit meno lwak gubedo piny i dul ki dul, miya miya, ki pyerabic pyerabic. 	So they sat down in groups of hundreds and fifties.
ci ludoŋo pyeraryo wiye aŋwen-ni giryebbe piny i nyim en ŋat ma obedo i wi komker ca, ci guworo en ŋat ma bedo kwo nakanaka-ni	the twenty-four elders fall down before him who sits on the throne and worship him who lives for ever and ever
ka doŋ ibin ilub kora.” 	Then come, follow me.”
kel pigi me tweyo chi lukwoo magi 	bring the handcuffs for handcuffing the hands of these thieves
kadi beddi oballo wekke 	even though he has made a mistake 
jobbe i pii mit mada 	diving into the water is very nice 
pan bukke woko. kama dano mo pe twerro nonggone 	hide the book in a place where nobody can find it
wamoko bene genwa i kome ni bilarowa doki. 	He has delivered us from such a deadly peril, and he will deliver us again
Pi meno, pe myero waninu anina macalo jo mukene, ento wabed ka neno piny kun wagwokke. 	So then, let us not be like others, who are asleep, but let us be awake and sober.
En dok, cito kelo cen mukene abiro ma giraco gikate woko, ci gidonyo gibedo i ode-ni	Then it goes and takes seven other spirits more wicked than itself, and they go in and live there
wek obed bota kit macalo iwaco.” Lacen lamalaika oa woko ki bote. 	“May your word to me be fulfilled.” Then the angel left her.
Pe tye gin mo ma giumo ma pe gibiyabo ka maleŋ, kadi gin ma gikano ma pe biŋene. 	There is nothing concealed that will not be disclosed, or hidden that will not be made known.
Ka gutyeko nino mapolpol kunnu, ci gulwokogi ki kuc i kare ma gidok bot utmego ma yam gucwalogi-ni. [ 	After spending some time there, they were sent off by the believers with the blessing of peace to return to those who had sent them.
potto i bal	to fall into sin
Obolo botgi dok carolok mukene ni, “Ker me polo rom ki tobi ma dako mo okwanyo orubo ki moko mugati ma romo adita adek, nio ka moko ducu oyenyo, okwot.” 	He told them still another parable: “The kingdom of heaven is like yeast that a woman took and mixed into about sixty pounds of flour until it worked all through the dough.”
Waŋeyo ni cik ber ka dano otiyo kwede i yo ma cik mito, 	They want to be teachers of the law, but they do not know what they are talking about or what they so confidently affirm.
bongone dong onioggo mada 	the cloth is very dirty
tut tye ka gut woko iiye 	the pus is accumulating in his abdomen
kodi dano-nu labwol dano, dok bene lakwor pa Kricito. 	I say this because many deceivers, who do not acknowledge Jesus Christ as coming in the flesh, have gone out into the world
bil lee ki yat 	tame the animals with medicine
lawed lok 	one who talks carelessly
Ka doŋ kare okato malac, ladit pa lutic magi odwogo, ocako kwano lim kacel kwedgi. 	“After a long time the master of those servants returned and settled accounts with them.
pe dong inenno, man dong nen maber mada ki bongo maleng ma irukko 	look, now you look very nice in the clean dress that you have worn
jammi woka ma gulwoko ki nyaagi dwog mada 	things that they have sent with their daughter to her home are too many 
I kit acel-lu kombeddi doŋ gukwero winyo doge i kare ma en otimo botwu kica, wek omi gin bene gitim kica botgi kit meno. 	Just as you who were at one time disobedient to God have now received mercy as a result of their disobedience,
gadigi dong gicaro dano 	so and so is a poor human specimen
Agripa owaco bot Paulo ni, “Giye ni ilok giri piri keni.” Ci Paulo oryeyo bade ka ocako pidone kun wacci, 	Then Agrippa said to Paul, “You have permission to speak for yourself.” So Paul motioned with his hand and began his defense:
pi meno mar aye ma cobo cik. 	Love does no harm to a neighbor
Dok bene i kom lok man ducu, i kin wan ki wun giketo iye loŋo matut, wek ka jo ma gimito ŋolo nia ki kany, me bino botwu, pe otwerre, wek ŋat mo bene pe oŋol nia ki kunnu me bino botwa kany.’ 	So he called to him, ‘Father Abraham, have pity on me and send Lazarus to dip the tip of his finger in water and cool my tongue, because I am in agony in this fire.’
i gunia pe wupik kal opong iye ni ribi ribi pien pe tweene 	in the guny bag do not fill millet up to the brim because it cannot be tied
cakke koni ibimako dano.” 	and so were James and John, the sons of Zebedee, Simon’s partners
dok binyutte tic madito makato magi, wek wuur. 	For the Father loves the Son and shows him all he does
gee cet woko ki i ngwiny Latin 	clean the faeces from the child's bottom
Larema ma amaro, in lagen mada i ticci ma itiyo pi utmegiwa, makatone bot welo ma pe iŋeyogi, 	I have no greater joy than to hear that my children are walking in the truth.
pe ber anyira me rubbe ki awobe ka kwang 	it is not ngood for the girls to mix with boys when swimming
poto man twerro purre maber mada 	this field can be well cultivated 
ladit maarro tuuro dano atuura ka gitye ka cam 	the big man always likes very much to come unexpectedly upon the people when they are eating
cam cek awene? 	when will the food be ready
pyer paline dok lac twatwal ywiin woko 	the pair of the trousers' waist is too large, reduce it
nyaarro wic ki magac 	trimming the hair with scissors
Owaco bot lapur ni, ‘Nen, koni doŋ odoko mwaka adek kun abino, ayenyo nyig oduro man, pe anoŋo. Toŋ woko	So he said to the man who took care of the vineyard, ‘For three years now I’ve been coming to look for fruit on this fig tree and haven’t found any
Utmegiwa, wun kikomwu wuŋeyo ni, binowa botwu yam pe obedo me nono. 	You know, brothers and sisters, that our visit to you was not without results.
wek gin ma cik mito ocobbe i komwa, wan jo ma pe doŋ walubo kit me kom ma ginywalowa kwede, ento walubo yo pa Cwiny Maleŋ. 	because through Christ Jesus the law of the Spirit who gives life has set you free from the law of sin and death.
Ento Cira otamo ni ber edoŋo kunnu.] 	But Silas decided to remain there.
En ociko lupwonnye ni guyub yeya matidi pire, wek pe lwak gubed ka diyo en. 	Because of the crowd he told his disciples to have a small boat ready for him, to keep the people from crowding him.
tud tol kany 	knot the string here 
mukekane lac ni tam 	the mat is very wide and broad 
ka imitti pe ibed ki cweyo ci cam pot dek ki nyig yadi madwong dok itiyo tic bene me yot kom 	if you do not want to get fat, eat a lot vegetables and fruits and do exercises 
jami ducu en aye ceŋ otiyo, pe tye gin mo ma ceŋ giketo laboŋo en. 	In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God.
Ento ka ce an aryemo cen pi ciŋ Lubaŋa, ci doŋ wuŋe ni ker pa Lubaŋa doŋ obino botwu. 	But if I drive out demons by the finger of God, then the kingdom of God has come upon you.
Ento Laparicayo mo ma i lukiko ma nyiŋe Gamaliel, lapwony-cik ma dano ducu giworo, oa malo ci ociko ni koŋ gicwalgi woko pi kare manok. 	But a Pharisee named Gamaliel, a teacher of the law, who was honored by all the people, stood up in the Sanhedrin and ordered that the men be put outside for a little while.
piny dong otwoo me moyo 	ground is now dry for putting things on to dry
Pien gin ma a ki i cwiny dano aye tam maraco, nek, abor, cot, kwalo kwo, bedo caden me goba, yet. 	But the things that come out of a person’s mouth come from the heart, and these defile them.
Lureme ducu ki mon ma yam gubino kwede nia i Galilaya, gucuŋ ki cen kun gineno gin man. 	But all those who knew him, including the women who had followed him from Galilee, stood at a distance, watching these things.
Ŋat mulwoŋowu-ni genne, dok bitiyo. 	The one who calls you is faithful, and he will do it.
Piŋo wan ducu dok wawinyogi kun ŋat acel acel tye ka lok i leb tugi kikome ma ginywale iye? 	Then how is it that each of us hears them in our native language?
ginne tye malo twatwal pe twerro gudde  	the thing is too high it cannot be touched
Otto olwayo ot madit mada  	Otto has built a large house
Anyuto botwu laminwa Foibe, ma en latic pa lwak jo ma guye Kricito ma tye i Kenkeria. 	who has gone into heaven and is at God’s right hand—with angels, authorities and powers in submission to him.
gammo wer 	joining in a song
Pien yam gicoyo ni, “Lubaŋa oketo en obedo lalo jami ducu.” Ka giwaco ni oketo “jami ducu” i te locce, nen ka maleŋ ni pe gikwano iye Lubaŋa kikome, ma oketo jami ducu i te loc pa Kricito. 	For he “has put everything under his feet.” Now when it says that “everything” has been put under him, it is clear that this does not include God himself, who put everything under Christ.
rac mada me tenggo wii litino me timmo gin marac 	it is very bad to divert the children to do bad things
Agamo ni, ‘Rwot, gin kikomgi giŋeyo ni i kacokke acel acel abedo ka pwodo dano ma guye in, atweyogi bene i mabuc. 	“‘Lord,’ I replied, ‘these people know that I went from one synagogue to another to imprison and beat those who believe in you.
tye ka nenno can mada  	he is suffering very much
I cawa adek en ocito woko, ci oneno jo mukene ma gucuŋo acuŋa i cuk laboŋo gin ma gitiyo. 	“About nine in the morning he went out and saw others standing in the marketplace doing nothing.
tim moo man me wirro wii atinna 	use this oil for your hair sparingly tin pip today 
dyanggi ma komgi obedo opilo pilo pe gimiyo me nyom 	the striped cattle are not given for marriage
Ka Juda obino ci okemo bot Yecu atir, ocako mote ni, “Lapwony,” ci onoto leme. 	Going at once to Jesus, Judas said, “Rabbi!” and kissed him.
en pe maarro beddo i tim 	he does not like to stay away from home 
gitwerro geggo nyal makko nyonyo ka giwirro kom gi ki moo me nyonyo	metals can be prevented from becoming rusty if they are smeared with grease
yamo okoddo matek ci oyecco bendera woko 	the wind blew very strongly and tore off the flag
acikari myerro pe gibeddo ka bappo lem dano atata 	the police should not be in the habit of slapping the cheeks of the people
yat man odongo oran ki iyoo pe twerro medde wek onyak 	this tree has failed to grow and cannot grow any more in order to produce some fruits 
litino tye ka nyello tee gang wek mac pe owang oddi 	children are cutting round the boundary of the home 
Watye ki gen matek i kom Lubaŋa piwu, pien waŋeyo ni, ka wunywako kwedwa can ma waciro, kumeno bene gibikweyo cwinywu kit macalo yam gikweyo kwede cwinywa. 	For just as we share abundantly in the sufferings of Christ, so also our comfort abounds through Christ.
Ka iketo pwony magi i nyim utmego, ci ibibedo latic pa Kricito Yecu maber, ma gipito ki lok me niye ki pwony mabeco ma ibedo ka luboneni. 	because it is consecrated by the word of God and prayer.
Pe oye dano mo olube, kono nyo Petero ki Yakobo ki Jon omin Yakobo keken. 	He did not let anyone follow him except Peter, James and John the brother of James.
lok terro i kot 	taking up the matter in the court
nyutte yoo 	show him the way 
litino man lukwaa Omal 	these children are Omal's grandchildren 
gin gimitto dyang ma lalem me atumma 	they want the hornless cow for sacrifice
Lubaŋa aye mumiyo wubedo i Kricito Yecu, ma Lubaŋa omiyo odoko ryekowa. Pi Kricito bene omiyo Lubaŋa okwanowa ni kitwa atir, olonyowa wadoko jo maleŋ, okokowa bene ki i opii me bal. 	It is because of him that you are in Christ Jesus, who has become for us wisdom from God—that is, our righteousness, holiness and redemption.
wucit wunu ka wanggo lum ma i get gang wek obed maleng 	go all of you to burn the grass around the home to make it clean 
Ket cik man, wek gubed laboŋo lok mo ma gijukogi iye. 	But the widow who lives for pleasure is dead even while she lives.
Ki luyak bene ma onoŋo gigurogi kacel kwede gucaye i kit acel-lu. 	Let God rescue him now if he wants him, for he said, ‘I am the Son of God.’”
ginynyo wang twatwal kello lit wang	to rub the eyes frequently with the hand causes eye illness 
nenne rac ki i wangge 	he hates him
itte operre calo it olik 	his ears are wide as that of a bat
Waore kacel ki ominwa ca ma ŋene twatwal bot jo ducu ma guye Kricito pi kit ma en tito kwede lok me kwena maber. 	For Titus not only welcomed our appeal, but he is coming to you with much enthusiasm and on his own initiative.
cingge myel 	his hands are trembling 
warre ducu ma kitgi pat pat 	all the shoes were of different types 
Pien meno ducu otimme piwu, wek kica pa Lubaŋa omedde bot jo mapol, wek gin bene gumedde ki pwoc madwoŋ ma kelo deyo bot Lubaŋa. 	because we know that the one who raised the Lord Jesus from the dead will also raise us with Jesus and present us with you to himself.
Ma ka timo kit meno, wun kikomwu aye dok wulokke wudok ka timo dano marac, dok bene wubuyo kadi wa utmegiwu. 	Instead, you yourselves cheat and do wrong, and you do this to your brothers and sisters.
Ka komgi oryaŋŋe, ci guryebbe piny, co-nu gupenyogi ni, “Piŋo wuyenyo dano makwo i kin jo muto? [ 	While they were wondering about this, suddenly two men in clothes that gleamed like lightning stood beside them.
lajog lim pa gobumente nyo pa miri 	a government tax collector, a tax officer
me tango mada in dano madit me lunynye dong lunywn i nyim litino 	it is unbelievable for you a big person to undress before the children 
ting latin ci ento pe i ret piny 	take the child but do not throw him down 
tin camme atinna 	eat the food sparingly 
cit ka lwok i babu 	go to take a bath in the bathtub 
litino guo woko ni pep mape ononggo purl wayubbe me jollogi 	the children arrived suddenly before we were ready to receive them 
gwel eel kany	defaecate here
Ento dato ma lacan obino ci obolo iye cente aryo, ma rom ki cente abic me kare-ni. 	But a poor widow came and put in two very small copper coins, worth only a few cents.
Dok aŋagi ce ma yam cwinye owaŋ i komgi pi mwaka pyeraŋwen kulu-ni? Pe gin aye jo ma yam gutimo bal, ma komgi odoŋ i tim kunnu? 	And with whom was he angry for forty years? Was it not with those who sinned, whose bodies perished in the wilderness?
Omako mugati, ka doŋ opwoyo, ci obaro iye, omiyogi kun wacci, “Man aye koma [ma gimiyo piwu, wutim kuman me po pira.” 	And he took bread, gave thanks and broke it, and gave it to them, saying, “This is my body given for you; do this in remembrance of me.”
owotto ki ooyo nyuka ni pac pac i dye ot 	he went on spilling the porridge along the floor
mony omakko laworo  	she started menstruation yesterday
nyany wang coo i kin poto maggi 	part boundary between these fields
ber mape wacce 	very good
omiyo wel tung amuka ocitto malo twatwal 	it made the price of the rinocheros horns very high
ento kombeddi ma doŋ ateggi-ni, doŋ abwoto kit me tino woko. 	When I became a man, I put the ways of childhood behind me.
ka itweyo gut gwok logo logo ci wotto wiye woko 	if you tie the dog's neck loosely, it will pull off its head out of the knot 
maar yabbo yoo ki dano 	love opens way for people 
Ka gutyeko tito lok me caden ki tuco lok pa Rwot, ci gudok i Jerucalem, kun gitito lok me kwena maber i paco mapol ma i Camaria. 	After they had further proclaimed the word of the Lord and testified about Jesus, Peter and John returned to Jerusalem, preaching the gospel in many Samaritan villages.
bitto gwok ki cam 	to allure a dog with food
yenynye me nonggo kama gikanno iye luduko oollo dano mada 	searching for where the gun was hidden tired people completely
gubako doggi bote pire. 	Now Simon’s mother-in-law was suffering from a high fever, and they asked Jesus to help her.
lok ma kiteno guddo cwiny dano marac mada 	such types of talks affect the feelings of people very badly 
gweno labok en aye gimaarro mada me kwer 	the brownish yellow chicken is the one that is used for ritual ceremony
Ka oa ki kunnu ci ocito i ot pa laco mo ma nyiŋe Titio Yucito, lawor Lubaŋa ma ode tye cok ki kacokke pa Lujudaya. 	Then Paul left the synagogue and went next door to the house of Titius Justus, a worshiper of God.
Yecu ogamo ni, “Cik mukwoŋo en ene, ‘Wuwiny wun jo Icrael, Rwot Lubaŋawa en Rwot acel. 	“The most important one,” answered Jesus, “is this: ‘Hear, O Israel: The Lord our God, the Lord is one.
bok ki wan gin ma inenno ki i Japan 	tell us what you saw in Japan
nen Lubaŋa doŋ omiyo boti dano ma iwoto kwedgi ducu.’ 	You must stand trial before Caesar; and God has graciously given you the lives of all who sail with you.’
jalle odok i lwak peny mapol ma gipenynye kwedde ma kwok dong obinno jibbe ajibba i nyimme 	the fellow answered many questions put to him and beads of sweat began to appear on his forehead
me tango mada in dano madit me lunynye dong lunywn i nyim litino 	it is madness for you a big person to undress before the children 
origgo mabor ma kare pe 	he ran very far indeed 
nyakone ber mada 	the girl is very beautiful
tunggo lee woko ki i dog kulo 	stirring off the animal from the river
gucakko tuure ka lweny pi lok mo matitkii mo 	they suddenly started to fight over a very small thing
tim ma kit eno myerro ogik ki acelli keken	such behaviour must stop with only this one
Pien Daudi yam oloko i kome ni, ‘Kare ducu aŋeyo ni Rwot tye kweda	David said about him: “‘I saw the Lord always before me
Ka doŋ omotogi, Paulo otito kikore gin mapol ma Lubaŋa otiyo i kin Lurok pi ticce. 	Paul greeted them and reported in detail what God had done among the Gentiles through his ministry.
gitye ka tetto ngoo? 	what are they forging? 
yadi ducu ma gipitto i kare man ner woko 	all the trees which are planted these days withered away
Ento gin magi ducu watye ka loyogi matek pi ŋat ma ceŋ omarowa-ni. 	As it is written: “For your sake we face death all day long; we are considered as sheep to be slaughtered.”
bil ka cukari tye i caine 	taste whether there is sugar in the tea
Ento Yecu ocito wa i wi got Jeituni. 	(He meant Judas, the son of Simon Iscariot, who, though one of the Twelve, was later to betray him.)
Kit macalo onoŋo doŋ pe twero culo banya-nu, ci laditte ociko ni myero gicate woko i opii, en kacel ki dakone ki litino, ki kit jami ducu ma onoŋo en tye kwede, wek gicul ki banya meno. 	Since he was not able to pay, the master ordered that he and his wife and his children and all that he had be sold to repay the debt.
en tye i i ot kuno 	he is within the house there 
laduur butte kee kom cam pien ka dano pud tye i ot pe mitto cammo cam wekko koni giremme 	a stingy person can sleep without eating food if people are still there because he fears that they will eat part ot the food made for him
Pien remo twoni ki remo dyegi pe twero kwanyo bal woko wacel. 	It is impossible for the blood of bulls and goats to take away sins.
piine twerro yeene 	the water can be carried
ŋat ma Lubaŋa ocikke bote oyubbe me tyero wode acel keken macalo gitum bot Lubaŋa, 	He who had embraced the promises was about to sacrifice his one and only son,
Pe tye ŋat mo i dog cam ma oniaŋ gin ma omiyo oloko lok man bote. 	Jesus answered, “It is the one to whom I will give this piece of bread when I have dipped it in the dish.” Then, dipping the piece of bread, he gave it to Judas, the son of Simon Iscariot.
ket boo kong oner manok i ceng ka dong iteddi 	put the cowpeas leaves to wither a bit in the sun and then cook 
nino ducu adok gang caa abicel	always I return home at midday 
nenno latinnne ka gwinno ringo rac mada 	it is stupid to see the child eat the meat bit by bit
Nyut lok magi ki tic, ket cwinyi iye, wek dano gunen kit ma itye ka wot kwede anyim. 	Do not neglect your gift, which was given you through prophecy when the body of elders laid their hands on you.
Pilato ocoyo lok, oguro i wi yatariya	There they crucified him, and with him two others—one on each side and Jesus in the middle.
Nen, jo mogo ma lacen gibibedo meati, ki jo mogo meati gibibedo me lacen.” 	Indeed there are those who are last who will be first, and first who will be last.”
kel lyibi wek ayab kwede ki wii dero, pien amitto jubbo kal kuno 	bring for me the pole for opening the barn so that I may open it up, because I want to get the millet from there
Lokka ki gin ma atito yam pe obedo lok mo me ryeko me ywayo tamwu, ento onyuto tek pa Cwiny Maleŋ, 	My message and my preaching were not with wise and persuasive words, but with a demonstration of the Spirit’s power,
maarro wekko woko ka ticce nyo ginne tek 	loves to give up if the work or the thing is difficult
adwii myero pe gitimmo kiea	the terrorists should not be forgiven
‘Pienno dano twero weko wonne ki minne, moko i kom dakone matwal. 	‘For this reason a man will leave his father and mother and be united to his wife,
Ka kun coyo, kodi mogo okir i ŋet yo, winyo gubino, gucamo woko. 	As he was scattering the seed, some fell along the path, and the birds came and ate it up.
Wun ceŋ wuoro kwena bot Jon, en obolliwu lok me ada me caden. 	There is another who testifies in my favor, and I know that his testimony about me is true.
in anywalli me kwene? 	what citizen are you?
lacoone nyok mada 	the man is very strong, or courageous
Acwalo en botwu pi lok man kikome, wek en omi wuŋe kit ma watye kwede kany, dok bene myero ocuk cwinywu. 	Let your conversation be always full of grace, seasoned with salt, so that you may know how to answer everyone.
Pe acoyo lok man ni wek lewic omakwu, ento me pwonyowu macalo litinona ma amaro. 	I am writing this not to shame you but to warn you as my dear children.
Lacen i ŋe man awinyo woo madwoŋ macalo dwan lwak dano mapol ata ma gktye i polo ma giwacci, “Aleluya! Laro dano ki deyo ki teko tye bot Lubaŋawa, 	After this I heard what sounded like the roar of a great multitude in heaven shouting: “Hallelujah! Salvation and glory and power belong to our God,
cok cokki wabicito i London 	shortly or very soon we shall be going to London 
Omiyo Yecu owaco ki gin ni, “Ka doŋ wutiŋo Wod pa dano malo, ci wubiniaŋ ni an a en, dok ni pe atiyo gin mo pira kena, ento aloko gin ma Wora opwonya iye. 	They did not understand that he was telling them about his Father.
mogo giteerrogi woko i cuk 	some have been taken to the market
ngemmo cukari dok madowong twatwal	takes too much sugar in his hand
tyen mapol wic ma din ni juny, en aye nyugi bene beddo iye 	many times very much hair is also the place where many lice do live
Onoŋo gicoyo nyiŋ i kom jorre ki i eme ma kwanne ni, Kabaka ma loyo luker ducu ki Rwot pa rwodi. 	On his robe and on his thigh he has this name written: king of kings and lord of lords.
Cutcut Cwiny Maleŋ otero Yecu woko wa i tim. 	At once the Spirit sent him out into the wilderness,
gutengge woko liweng, gang odong kene 	all the people went away and the village was left empty
ladwar neno opoko pii ki wange	the hunter looks into the water gourd with his own eyes
Pien bal pe doki bibwoyowu, pien wun doŋ pe wutye i te cik, ento wutye i te kica pa Lubaŋa. 	Therefore do not let sin reign in your mortal body so that you obey its evil desires.
pe i week jamini olal ata, pid pirre matek 	do not stand to just lose your property, plead vingorously for it
kor lee twerro rotte 	the track of the animal can be tracked
Pe myero wubwolle kekenwu, pien doŋ wubwoto kwowu macon ki ticce ducu, 	But now you must also rid yourselves of all such things as these: anger, rage, malice, slander, and filthy language from your lips.
yaccu mego komme  	pregnancy enervates her
guwekko cogo odong ni waka kenyo ma gucammo 	they left the dry bones scattered all over there from the meat which they ate
Marita owaco bot Yecu ni, “Rwot, kono nene itye kany, kono omera pe oto. 	When Martha heard that Jesus was coming, she went out to meet him, but Mary stayed at home.
Bibedo kit meno i kare ma gibinyuto iye Wod pa dano. 	“It will be just like this on the day the Son of Man is revealed.
en labwoto me barro akwota 	he is an expert in opening or incising abscesses 
joo Lamogi gitye ki kit yoo ma gitweerro wekko naka katto woko kadi i kare ma myerro pe gukat iye 	the Lamogi people have a certain way in which they can make these white ants come out even if it is not their season to come out
Juda, ma ceŋ odobe, bene onoŋo ŋeyo kabedo meno, pien Yecu ki lupwonnyene yam gimaro cokke kunnu. 	On the other side there was a garden, and he and his disciples went into it.
ka wubeddo ka ywayo kom aywaya mape wutinggogi atingga ci yoggo tyengi woko 	if you always dreg the chairs along the floor without carrying them, this will loosen their legs
jig kommi matek ci ityekko gin ma itye ka tiyoneni 	put all your energy into it and you will succeed 
ee gwee, gweyo cakke dong opotto woko ci ngwecce dong pe mit 	the milk has clotted and therefore its smell is not good 
dye kal dong tye ka bakke mada ki tum 	the compound is now overgrowing with the grass 
rutto lok i kom dano 	instigating a case against a person
“Pe dano ducu ma gilwoŋa ni, ‘Rwot, Rwot’ aye gibidonyo i ker me polo, ento ŋat ma tiyo gin ma Wora ma i polo mito. 	Thus, by their fruit you will recognize them.
kong gugugge piny ka dong guwer 	let them first kneel down and then sing 
tuddo dong woko 	joining together against someone
Ka utmego guŋeyo lokke, ci gularo kwede i Cecaria, ci gucwale i Taruco. 	When the believers learned of this, they took him down to Caesarea and sent him off to Tarsus.
Wuketo cwinywu me gwoko nino, ki dwe, ki kare mapatpat, ki mwaka-gu! 	Formerly, when you did not know God, you were slaves to those who by nature are not gods.
tye ka pyem ni en pe labal 	he is protesting his innocence 
Man te lokke niŋo, ni, ‘Wubiyenya, ento pe wubinoŋa,’ dok ni, ‘Ka ma abedo iye, wun pe wutwero o iye’?” 	The Jews said to one another, “Where does this man intend to go that we cannot find him? Will he go where our people live scattered among the Greeks, and teach the Greeks?
Lubaŋa otiŋe malo i ŋete yo tuŋ acuc i kabedo me deyo pi bedo Laker ki Lalar, wek jo Icrael gunoŋ kare me ŋut ci en owek balgi. 	God exalted him to his own right hand as Prince and Savior that he might bring Israel to repentance and forgive their sins.
tye ka tatto lok me kwoo matye kany 	he is investingating the theft here
Lacen Yecu owaco bot lwak ki bot lupwonnyene ni, 	And a voice from heaven said, “This is my Son, whom I love; with him I am well pleased.”
En dok okulle piny, ocoyo ŋom ki lwete. 	When they kept on questioning him, he straightened up and said to them, “Let any one of you who is without sin be the first to throw a stone at her.”
kun kwanyo i kom ŋat acel acel ma oye en bal ducu ma pe gitwero kwanyo i komwu i te cik pa Moses. 	Through him everyone who believes is set free from every sin, a justification you were not able to obtain under the law of Moses.
ento pe amito ni atim gin mo ma kun noŋo in pe iye, wek berri pe obed macalo gin ma gidiyi iye adiya, ento obed pi yeyoni in kikomi. 	I am sending him—who is my very heart—back to you.
ywee tee baraja maleng 	sweep the verandah clean 
oyoo gollo odde 	the rat burrows its hole in the ground
Lok man Jon mucwalo bot lwak muye Kricito ma gitye i kabedo abiro mapatpat i Acia: Kica ki kuc obed botwu, ma oa ki bot Lubaŋa ma tye, ma yam obedo tye wa con, dok ma bibino, kun a ki bot cwiny abiro ma gitye i nyim komkerre, 	John, To the seven churches in the province of Asia: Grace and peace to you from him who is, and who was, and who is to come, and from the seven spirits before his throne,
pe ipoo ni nenne wapenynye ka en okwanynyo buk, oteerro me kwanone, ci oyee bene, man dong dag woko 	don't you remember, that last time we asked him, whether he took the book, and he agreed, but now he denies
jullo gweno wek onyaa 	taking special care in rearing the chicken in order to make them multiply
Lucaden aryo-ni gin aye yadi jeituni ki okar mac tara ma cuŋ i nyim Rwot me lobo. 	They are “the two olive trees” and the two lampstands, and “they stand before the Lord of the earth.”
ree paala i kom latin 	smear the body of the child with red ochre 
ka tukko odilo 	coming to play football 
ngadi dok larere twatwal kadi gin ma en pe iye ride iye 	so and so is a meddler even in a thing which does not concern him, he joins in 
latinne dok marro uu twatwal ki cam 	the child chocking frequently with food or the child gets frequent attacks of chocks with food 
nyo ni, ‘Aŋa ma bidonyo i bur ma tere pe gik?’ ” (ni, me kelo Kricito woko ki i kin jo muto). 	But the righteousness that is by faith says: “Do not say in your heart, ‘Who will ascend into heaven?’” (that is, to bring Christ down)
Pien kica pa Lubaŋa doŋ onen pi laro dano ducu. 	and not to steal from them, but to show that they can be fully trusted, so that in every way they will make the teaching about God our Savior attractive.
twerro mokke 	the firewood can be lit 
tad wii dero 	construct a frame for the barn's cover 
lwoc pud oummo piny woko 	the place is still covered by the mist
Dano ducu guuro matek, kun gipenye kekengi ni, Man gin aŋo? Man aye dok kit pwony manyen bo? Nen en ka ciko wa cen maraco-gu ki twero, ci gin bene giwinyo doge.	The people were all so amazed that they asked each other, “What is this? A new teaching—and with authority! He even gives orders to impure spirits and they obey him.”
ceng malyet miyo kal ran woko 	hot sun makes the millet stunted 
nyukane pek pe matte 	the porridge is too thick, it cannot be drunk
Ŋat ma timo bal, meno noŋo dano pa Catan	The one who does what is sinful is of the devil, because the devil has been sinning from the beginning
Wubineno can, pien wucano got i wi lyel pa lunebi ma yam kwariwu guneko. 	So you testify that you approve of what your ancestors did; they killed the prophets, and you build their tombs.
Ka doŋ otyeko loko lok meno, ci gitiŋe malo, ma gin bene gineno, ka pol ogame woko ki i nyimgi. 	After he said this, he was taken up before their very eyes, and a cloud hid him from their sight.
peny owok nigning? 	what is the result of the examinations?
Gucako cito wa i Kapernaum, ci cutcut i ceŋ cabit Yecu odonyo i kacokke, ocako pwonyogi. 	They went to Capernaum, and when the Sabbath came, Jesus went into the synagogue and began to teach.
joo Ataga gicweyo atabo mabecco mada 	the Ataga people make very good bowls
kel nyol me gurro mucumar eno 	bring the hammer for hitting the nails
Gin ducu gukok kun gikwako ŋut Paulo ki mot me mar. 	They all wept as they embraced him and kissed him.
ki dano mo mukene tye ka gero ot i wiye. Ento dano acel acel myero ogwokke kit macalo etye kwede ka gedo. 	But each one should build with care.
Pi gin maber ma ticwu kelo, bimiyo jo mapol gimiyo deyo bot Lubaŋa, pien nyuto winy maber ma wutye kwede i lok me kwena maber i kom Kricito ma watito, ki pi cwiny maber ma wupoko kwede limwu bot jo-nu ki bot jo mukene ducu. 	Now he who supplies seed to the sower and bread for food will also supply and increase your store of seed and will enlarge the harvest of your righteousness.
man en aye dwee me abongwen me mwaka man	this is the nineth month of this year
guterro pamba meegi i cuma kama gibitto iye nyigge 	they took their cotton to the ginnery where the cotton is ginned,
“Nen, laticca ma ayero ma amaro, ma cwinya yom i kome. Abiketo Cwiny Maleŋ i kome, en bituco ŋolo kop atir bot Lurok. 	This was to fulfill what was spoken through the prophet Isaiah:
dano myerro pe gingoo ki aniino 	people should not be beaten with the whip
pil wii lobo meeri me timmo gin maber me deyo ka itye woko 	give respect and honour to your country when you are outside it by doing good things and behaving well
Gwok cik ma gimiyi, bed laboŋo kit roc mo nyo lok mo ma gijuki iye, nio ka Rwotwa Yecu Kricito binen. 	In the sight of God, who gives life to everything, and of Christ Jesus, who while testifying before Pontius Pilate made the good confession, I charge you
“Oito malo” te lokke aŋo? Te lokke ni olor piny bene i lobo ka matut.	This is why it says: “When he ascended on high, he took many captives and gave gifts to his people.”
Pe meno keken, ento i kare ma Labeka bene oyac ki laco acel, ma en aye kwarowa Icaka, 	For this was how the promise was stated: “At the appointed time I will return, and Sarah will have a son.”
tim gamani ceng mo biteerri i can 	your impulsiveness will one day put you into trouble 
nen lumeroko caa, makgi 	look, the enemies are there capture them
I kare meno Yecu otuco ni, “Apwoyi Wora, in Rwot me polo ki me lobo, pien ikano lok magi woko ki bot luryeko ki luŋe-piny, ci inyutogi bot litino lukere. 	At that time Jesus said, “I praise you, Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because you have hidden these things from the wise and learned, and revealed them to little children.
Latic meno ma oŋeyo gin ma laditte mito, ento pe oyubbe iye, dok pe olubo gin ma laditte mito, gibipwode matek twatwal. 	“The servant who knows the master’s will and does not get ready or does not do what the master wants will be beaten with many blows.
pii ne dong ocwiny woko 	the water has dried up 
pe ibed ka ywayo meja aywaya leggo tyenne woko 	don't drag the table about, it loosens its legs 
Ento jo mogo i kin Luparicayo gupenyogi ni, “Piŋo wutimo gin ma cik okwero ni pe giti i ceŋ cabit?” 	Some of the Pharisees asked, “Why are you doing what is unlawful on the Sabbath?”
pe ibed ka jerro lawoti i kin dano 	don't humiliate your friend among the people 
i dong 	in the mouth 
Utmega, piŋo dok pud giuna, ka an kikoma aye atito ni lirre ber? Ka nene atito lok kumeno, kono pe tye gin mo i lok i kom yatariya ma obedo macalo ajut ma yoko dano. 	The one who is throwing you into confusion, whoever that may be, will have to pay the penalty.
Yam atimo bal ka mwolle kena wek aket dit i komwu, kun atito botwu lok me kwena maber mua ki bot Lubaŋa nono, laboŋo gamo cul mo? 	I do not think I am in the least inferior to those “super-apostles.”
Ka Cimon Petero oneno, opoto piny i coŋ Yecu, owaco ni, “Rwot, cit giri, iweko, pien an labalo.” 	So they signaled their partners in the other boat to come and help them, and they came and filled both boats so full that they began to sink.
owaco botgi ni, “Dano ducu ma jolo latin man i nyiŋa, noŋo ojolo an, dano ducu ma jolo an, noŋo ojolo ŋat ma oora	Then he said to them, “Whoever welcomes this little child in my name welcomes me; and whoever welcomes me welcomes the one who sent me
Jo ma doŋ koŋ ceŋ omenyogi kicel, ma gubilo mot ma oa ki i polo, kun gibedo i kin jo mulimo Cwiny Maleŋ, 	It is impossible for those who have once been enlightened, who have tasted the heavenly gift, who have shared in the Holy Spirit,
latin lakerre pe cirro koyo myerro komme beddo auma	a neonate does not stand the cold therefore her body must be covered all the time
Mac tara mapol obedo ka lyel i kicika ka ma wacokke iye-ni. 	There were many lamps in the upstairs room where we were meeting.
obong dyang ma malo lubo ma piny	the hoofs of a cow that are lifted up follow those which are on the ground
Laparicayo ocuŋ, olego gire kene kun waco ni, ‘Lubaŋa, apwoyi pien an pe acalo jo mukene, lubuma, jo ma pe genne, lutim abor, pe bene acalo lajogmucoro man. 	The Pharisee stood by himself and prayed: ‘God, I thank you that I am not like other people—robbers, evildoers, adulterers—or even like this tax collector.
ngeyo tee lokke tek 	understanding its meaning is difficult 
pitto litino ki pitto latin lakere 	feeding the children and bringing them up and nourishing the baby
adukune gkieyo komme maber mada 	the basket's body has been well decorated 
Ento an aŋeye, pien aa ki bote, en aye oora.” 	At that point some of the people of Jerusalem began to ask, “Isn’t this the man they are trying to kill?
en aye ngat acel ma ononggo ret matek mada i dwar me cabit mukatto 	he is the person who got the severe injury in last week's hunting
ringo man twerro boone maber mada ki lwak katac lok awinya ma kanynyi 	the meat can be wrapped up very well with many news papers here
nyubbo komme ki latuk 	soils himself with soot (from the kitchen)
labolo mogo lye kwene 	where are some bananas? 
ga matye ka murro dek me acamma? 	who is warming the food for eating?
cementi en aye gin ma obeddo moko moko ma ka girubbu ki pii ci jig doko matek mada 	cement is a kind of powder which when it is mixed with water it sets to become very hard
man en aye dano mape ngic, dano ma lawitti witti mada 	this is the man who is not weak and sluggish, but very active and quick to act
Wunen ni ŋat mo pe obed latim abor, nyo dano ma pe lworo Lubaŋa calo Ecau, ma yam ocato ditte me anywalli me bedo latin kayo pi cam me tyen acel keken. 	See that no one is sexually immoral, or is godless like Esau, who for a single meal sold his inheritance rights as the oldest son.
ento pe obed kit ma an amito, obed kit ma in imito.” 	Yet not what I will, but what you will.”
pien ŋat ma pe maro ominne ma en oneno kome, pe twero maro Lubaŋa ma pe oneno kome. 	For whoever does not love their brother and sister, whom they have seen, cannot love God, whom they have not seen.
Dok onoŋo tye mon mogo ma gucuŋ ki cen ka nenone	Some women were watching from a distance
Lwak jo ma guye Yecu gin aye kom Kricito, ma miyo en opoŋ otum maber woko licwic, kun Kricito bene opoŋ i jami ducu ma i kabedo ducu.	And God placed all things under his feet and appointed him to be head over everything for the church,
nyaane dong otii 	she is mature now or fully grown up now 
lacoone twoyo abar-wic-leela twatwal	the man suffers too much from migraine
cukku kwac ki tong 	spearing the leopard with spear repeatedly
onyonno coo i kare ma en ringo ci okutone ocubbo tyenne marac mada 	he was pierced very badly by the quill of the porcupine when he stepped on it while running 
latin tye ka kok pien cugu lug okaye 	the child is crying because he was bitten by black ants
tye ka panne i ot 	he is hiding in the house 
latinne maarro kwanno buk mada	the child loves reading books 
cukari toppo lak woko 	sugar causes decay of teeth or causes teeth decay
okatto penynye maber mada me donynyo i kabeddo madit mada (yunibacity) me kwan 	he passed very well to enter into the university 
timgi ducu lawang acel	do all of them at once 
Lok i kom ominwa Apolo, yam alege mada ni koŋ myero oo botwu, kacel ki utmego mukene, ento en pe omito bino kadi ki acel i kare-ni	Now about our brother Apollos: I strongly urged him to go to you with the brothers
gin ma in itimmoni gin me gwok mada 	what you have done is a curse
Yam pe wuwinyo dog Lubaŋa, ento kombeddi doŋ en otimo kica botwu, ma onoŋo doŋ gin gukwero bedo ki winy woko i kome. 	for God’s gifts and his call are irrevocable.
gitye ka lullu ngom tyeng ki tyeng i kor got, wek ogeng kot lalelle mollo ngom woko kit kor got 	they are constructing long heaps of earth across the mountain, to prevent floods from washing away soil, (soil erosion) from the side of the mountain
I kit acel-lu, Daudi bene yam oloko pi gum ma dano tye kwede, ka Lubaŋa okwane ni en dano ma kite atir laboŋo tic mo ma en otiyo, macalo yam gicoyo ni, 	However, to the one who does not work but trusts God who justifies the ungodly, their faith is credited as righteousness.
lwak dok gucokke, omiyo en ki lupwonnyene pe gitwero noŋo kare me cam. 	Then Jesus entered a house, and again a crowd gathered, so that he and his disciples were not even able to eat.
Ka kare oromo, ci ooro luticce bot lupur ni myero gumine nyig olok mogo	At harvest time he sent a servant to the tenants so they would give him some of the fruit of the vineyard
ento lacen oloko kekene ni, ‘Kadi bed pe alworo Lubaŋa ba, kadi woro dano, 	But finally he said to himself, ‘Even though I don’t fear God or care what people think,
jang yat tye ka lot mada 	the tree is shooting forth many branches
Ento wukan lonyo piwu kenwu i polo, ka ma nyenye ki nyal pe gibalo, dok ka ma lukwo pe bino gituro ot ci gikwalo. 	“Do not store up for yourselves treasures on earth, where moths and vermin destroy, and where thieves break in and steal.
pele pa latin meno owekko gigoye	for her unrulybehaviour and restlessness made her him to be beaten
wubed i marra. 	“As the Father has loved me, so have I loved you
girukko kono luporo i kare me myel otole 	the big white ostrich feather headgear is worn during dances
Ento ŋat ma biciro nio wa i agikki bilarre. 	but the one who stands firm to the end will be saved.
paco dong oballe woko	the home is now destroyed
gudoko doŋ macalo gin ma i dano okwero, jo ma pe ki winy, ma pe doŋ giromo tiyo tic mo maber.	They claim to know God, but by their actions they deny him
Ento Lubaŋana bimiyowu jami ducu ma wumito, kun kwanyo ki i lonyone me deyo ma en tye kwede i Kricito Yecu. 	Not that I desire your gifts; what I desire is that more be credited to your account.
yaddi ma becco me laywee pe tye kany 	there are no good trees for brooms here
amitti i pim lac pa dye ot man pien amitto ketto lye kapet 	I want you to measure the size of this room because 
lok angoo? 	what news? 
gwerro pot dek	threading the vegetables into small bits or pieces
Pien bot Lubaŋawa nen atir ni, myero ecul can bot jo muketo can i komwu, 	God is just: He will pay back trouble to those who trouble you
wangge ogollo 	he has sunken eyes 
obutto ma otullo dudde 	she slept with her buttocks protruding
Wugwokke, ka ce obino oyotoyot pe onoŋwu wunino woko. 	If he comes suddenly, do not let him find you sleeping.
Ka Yecu obea woko ki i pii, otugi neno ka polo yabbe, ki Cwiny Maleŋ ma bino kun lyanne piny macalo akuri ci opye i kome. 	Just as Jesus was coming up out of the water, he saw heaven being torn open and the Spirit descending on him like a dove.
nyakone okatto kany ma akuura komme duny ni tuu	the girl passed here with a heavy smell of perfume from her body akwalla
Jo mogo ma gucuŋ kunnu gupenyogi ni, “Wubetimo gin aŋo, ma wugonyo ki latin kana-ni?” 	some people standing there asked, “What are you doing, untying that colt?”
Ka doŋ guburogi matek, ci guwekogi gucito	After further threats they let them go
en pe ngeyo cat	he does not know how to sell things 
Ci lupwonnye gucako kumo cut, kun gipenye ki acel acel ni, “An bo, Rwot?” 	They were very sad and began to say to him one after the other, “Surely you don’t mean me, Lord?”
lii pii ki dano me loggo	pour the water for the people to wash their hands
openo en aye gat acel i kom winyi ma walwongogi ni gako gako nyo go go 	openo is one of the turacos 
culle lim ma imakko 	pay him the money which you borrowed
Tamwa tye me timo gin maber, pe i nyim Lubaŋa keken, ento kadi wa i nyim dano bene. 	We want to avoid any criticism of the way we administer this liberal gift.
gwokke wunu mada, pe wujem pi lok ma teerre pe 	be very careful, do not strike on meaningless matters 
latin ma gwinynye onwengge 	an emaciated child with flat buttocks
otany i komgi ni meno gin aye ma gukwallo limme 	she set upon them with furious accusation that they were the ones who stole her money
wek econe ki dakone Maliam ma onoŋo otoŋo keny i kome, ma onoŋo oyac. 	He went there to register with Mary, who was pledged to be married to him and was expecting a child.
Gin mumiyo wabedo ki mar, pien en okwoŋo marowa. 	We love because he first loved us.
Atye ki gen mada i komwu	I do not say this to condemn you; I have said before that you have such a place in our hearts that we would live or die with you.
pe gicoyo kodi, dok bene pe gikayo, pe gitye ki dula kadi dero, ento Lubaŋa pitogi. Wun pe piwu tek kato pi winyo? 	And how much more valuable you are than birds!
Pi meno, utmegina, myero wutemme me medde wek wumok i lwoŋowu matek, ki i yer ma Lubaŋa oyerowu kwde	Therefore, my brothers and sisters, make every effort to confirm your calling and election
obeddo ki akeca madit mada i komme	he was very much annoyed with him 
pii magic ka gionyo i dek ci goyo woko 	if cold water is added to the sauce, it makes it watery
Kombeddi gin ma pire dit ma watye ka lokone kany en ene: Wan watye ki ajwaka madit macalo man, ma doŋ obedo i kabedo me deyo yo tuŋ acuc i ŋet komker pa Won Deyo Madit i polo. 	Now the main point of what we are saying is this: We do have such a high priest, who sat down at the right hand of the throne of the Majesty in heaven,
olio wang pii obed maleng 	clearing the spring water to make it clean 
Wuleg bene pira wek Lubaŋa oyab doga, omiya gin ma myero aloki, wek atuc muŋ me lok me kwena maber ki tekcwiny. 	Take the helmet of salvation and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God.
matto taa.rac pien kello twoo mapat pat i kom dano 	smoking tobacco is very bad because it causes various diseases in men
Aŋo mugeŋi tero limma bot jo ma loyo beŋŋe, wek i kare ma abino agam limma kacel ki magobane? 	Well then, you should have put my money on deposit with the bankers, so that when I returned I would have received it back with interest.
litino guteggo wot ategga gucitto wa Gulu 	the children took off and went as far as Gulu
amayo lim ki i cingge 	I snatched money from his hand
wang maber ki cig ma opye mot en aye miyo icello bap maber 	a good eye sight and a steady hand are the ones that make you shoot well at the target
litino akwarra pe gicirro koyo	the newly born babies cannot stand cold
Paulo obedo kunnu pi mwaka aryo kun kwo ki limme kene ci jolo lwak jo ducu ma bino bote. 	For two whole years Paul stayed there in his own rented house and welcomed all who came to see him.
apwoyo mot ma icwalla 	thank you for the gift which you sent me
ngat ma tye ki cwiny me nek pe dano me nino ducu ento wiye nonggo oballe woko, lapoya 	all people of good will have no thought of killings
aŋa ma twero winyo?” 	On hearing it, many of his disciples said, “This is a hard teaching
kadi ibed ber callo kwac nyanga wek wakke 	even if you are as beautiful as a leopard, do not boast 
latin ononggo dong tye ka myeno woko ma pud peya onenno minne 	the child was already about to cry before seeing his mother 
Ocako tuco lok i kom Yecu i kacokke cut kun waco ni, “En Wod pa Lubaŋa.” 	At once he began to preach in the synagogues that Jesus is the Son of God.
kom motoka man twerro jwaane ma ryeny maber mada 	the body of this car can be polished and shining 
Owaco botgi ni, “Wugwokke i kom lok ma wuwinyo	“Consider carefully what you hear,” he continued
ngad ii ka wek iywaa pall odok malo 	stretch your abdomen in order to draw the trouser up the abdomen
labolo ma ocek ka giwekko kama lyet ci top woko 	when a ripe banana is left in a warm place it rots 
ogullo manok lokke botwa	he revealed to us a secret of the case 
tyenggo kidi reggo 	roughing the grinding stone by knocking with another hard stone to make it rough so as to make it grind
odilo dong otoo woko	the football has deflated become reduced in size
Oweko meno ducu, ci okwanyo kit me opii, ka ginywale macalo dano. 	Who, being in very nature God, did not consider equality with God something to be used to his own advantage;
Ka guwinyo man, cwinygi oton, ci guwaco bot Petero ki lukwena mukene ni, “Utmego, wabitimo aŋo?” 	When the people heard this, they were cut to the heart and said to Peter and the other apostles, “Brothers, what shall we do?”
makko kiniga i komme 	to feel very angry with him
loc i tukko pe dong nyutte ni wun pe wungeyo tukko	defeat in the game, does not mean that you do not know how to play 
Ka ce dano mo odiyi tektek ni itiŋ yecce icit kwede i wot me mairo acel, wot kwede wot me mairo aryo. 	If anyone forces you to go one mile, go with them two miles.
Ka doŋ gucito woko, guloko kekengi ni, “Laco man pe otimo gin mo ma romme to, kadi bedo i mabuc.” 	After they left the room, they began saying to one another, “This man is not doing anything that deserves death or imprisonment.”
kacel ki Anac, ajwaka madit, ki Kayapa ki Jon ki Alegijanda, ki lwak ducu ma gitye i doggola pa ajwagi madito. 	Annas the high priest was there, and so were Caiaphas, John, Alexander and others of the high priest’s family.
Lacen ka man otum, Yecu ocito i Jerucalem pi nino madit pa Lujudaya ma onoŋo tye. 	“Do you now believe?” Jesus replied.
Oworgi gunoggo pekko i dwar pien pe gigoyo ki gin lam maber 	Owor and his friends got into trouble because they were not blessed
Luloc gumiyo Yacon ki utmego mukene guculo lim me lajeŋ, ka lacen guwekogi gucito. 	Then they made Jason and the others post bond and let them go.
par pi jami mabecco macon ma yang itimmo en aye ber 	reflection on the good things that you dki in the past, is better
Kunnu wubikok, wubikayo lakwu, ka wuneno Abraim ki Icaka ki Yakobo ki lunebi ducu kun gitye i ker pa Lubaŋa, ento wun kikomwu gibolowu woko. 	“There will be weeping there, and gnashing of teeth, when you see Abraham, Isaac and Jacob and all the prophets in the kingdom of God, but you yourselves thrown out.
yello lu mabuc pe ber 	to torment the prisoners is not good 
remmo lok me mung i nyim kacokke 	to let a very important secret to the assembly
I kare meno ka lupwonnye welgi omedde, ci Lujudaya ma giloko leb Grik gubedo ki ŋuro i kom Lujudaya ma giloko leb Ibru, ni pien nino ducu ka gipoko lim pe giparo pi mon togi. 	In those days when the number of disciples was increasing, the Hellenistic Jews among them complained against the Hebraic Jews because their widows were being overlooked in the daily distribution of food.
kal man twerro curre maber 	this millet can be very well pounded
pwony mitto dano ma kiniga pe makko oyot oyot, ma katto ka ipwonyno litino matino 	teaching requires people who are calm who do not get angry quickly, especially when teaching the very young ones
dogge bedi pwa pwa 	his mouth is overflowing with interesting talk
jigbaddi 	tighten the muscles of your arm 
wubed macalo jo ma kuro laditgi ka bidwogo nia ki i karama me nyom, wek giyabbe doggola oyotoyot ka en obino, odwoŋo. 	like servants waiting for their master to return from a wedding banquet, so that when he comes and knocks they can immediately open the door for him.
pwon mayembe ki kom yatte i cam 	pluck the mangoes from their tree and eat 
olik en aye winyo ma bwomme del pe yer calk pa winyi mukene 	a hat is a bird that has leathery wings not feathers like other birds 
dano gitye ka matto kongo lacoi 	people are drinking lacoi beer by sucking it from a pot 
cok jami ma oradde kiyee ot 	collect all the things which are scattered all over the floor
obeddo ka legga i kanica naka nioo ka piny oruu	he stayed in the church praying until dawn
gwenno placita ki i kom tyen 	peeling off the plaster from the leg
min latin tyen mapol jallo camme ki latinne ocam 	the child's mother usually leaves the food which she should eat to her child
latin tye ka joyo tyen leela woko 	the child is deflating the bicycle tyres 
olik marro nywal mada i boro 	bats like breeding very much in caves
Yecu odok iye botgi ni, “Wucit, wuwac bot too can ni, ‘Nen, abiryemo cen dok abicaŋo dano tin ki diki, i nino me adekke abicobone. 	He replied, “Go tell that fox, ‘I will keep on driving out demons and healing people today and tomorrow, and on the third day I will reach my goal.’
Ento Lubaŋa ocero en woko, kun gonye woko ki i arem me to, pien to pe twero moko i kome. 	But God raised him from the dead, freeing him from the agony of death, because it was impossible for death to keep its hold on him.
medda dekke dok manok 	give me some more food 
Gemo magi adek-ki, mac, ki yito ki alur me kidi calfa ma okatti ki i doggi oneko jo ma romo dul acel me adek pa dano ducu. 	A third of mankind was killed by the three plagues of fire, smoke and sulfur that came out of their mouths.
ogwal acel obalo wang pii	one frog spoils the well
luroro, jo ma tye atata ma pe giparo piny, jo ma gikette malo kengi ki wakke, jo ma maro yomcwiny ma ka maro Lubaŋa. 	without love, unforgiving, slanderous, without self-control, brutal, not lovers of the good,
tyenne ogerre 	he is bow legged
citto ka lillo tyenne maleng	to go to clean his legs very clean
Ento Yecu owaco botgi ni, “Dano ducu pe twero mako pwony macalo man, ento kono jo ma gimiyo botgi keken aye. 	Jesus replied, “Not everyone can accept this word, but only those to whom it has been given.
gutweyo bolo bolo 	they tied it loosely 
ginywalle i Mac ninone abic 	he she was born on the fifth of March
ento Yecu onoŋo onino woko. 	Suddenly a furious storm came up on the lake, so that the waves swept over the boat
pi willo conge woko omiyo pe dong ocitto	he did not go because of straining his knee 
lupwony gitye ka pwonyo litino 	the teachers are teaching the children 
wan ceng wacitto Kampala ki mabur ma wotto nia Atura nio Namasagali 	long time ago, we used to go to Kampala by boat from Atura to Namasagali
lwalle i myel, i cubbo lawala, i wer ki gala. 	competing in dancing, in circle game, in singing and making fun of each other
miyo litino me woo i kilaci pe ber	to let the children to to make too much noise, in the class is not good 
Baraba kono yam dano ma gitweye i mabuc pi tugo lwak i Jerucalem ki pi nek. 	(Barabbas had been thrown into prison for an insurrection in the city, and for murder.)
Ci Yecu odokke iye ni, “Itye ki gum, Cimon wod pa Yona! Pien gin mo ma tye i kom ki remo pe onyutti lok man, ento Wora ma tye i polo aye. 	Jesus replied, “Blessed are you, Simon son of Jonah, for this was not revealed to you by flesh and blood, but by my Father in heaven.
Kwariwa yam gucamo manna i tim, macalo gicoyo ni, ‘Omiyogi kwon me acama mua ki i polo.’ ” 	So they asked him, “What sign then will you give that we may see it and believe you? What will you do?
macalo yam gicoyo ni, “Ocoro jamine mapol, omiyo ki lucan, berre bedo nakanaka.” 	And God is able to bless you abundantly, so that in all things at all times, having all that you need, you will abound in every good work.
Ento in myero imedde i gin ma ipwonyo, ki ma doŋ iye adada, kun iŋeyo jo ma yam gupwonyi iye. 	while evildoers and impostors will go from bad to worse, deceiving and being deceived.
Minne ki omegine gubino, ento onoŋo pe gitwero o bote pi lwak. 	Now Jesus’ mother and brothers came to see him, but they were not able to get near him because of the crowd.
Gukelo bote litino matino, wek oket ciŋe i komgi	People were also bringing babies to Jesus for him to place his hands on them
cammi remme 	the food is not enough for him
Utmegina, gin ma amito ki cwinya ducu ma alego Lubaŋa pire, en aye ni myero jo Icrael gularre. 	He was delivered over to death for our sins and was raised to life for our justification.
Kwariwa yam giworo Lubaŋa i kom got man, ento wun wuwaco ni kabedo ma myero giwor iye Lubaŋa tye i Jerucalem.” 	“Sir,” the woman said, “I can see that you are a prophet.
ribbo wego acel 	to share the same father 
ngaa matye ka cuur? 	who is making noise? 
Ka ce ŋat mo odoŋo lemi tuŋ lacuc, lok bote lemi tuŋ lacam wek odoŋ bene	If anyone slaps you on the right cheek, turn to them the other cheek also.
dakone madde kene ka onywal 	the woman swabs herself when she has given birth
Abraim yam pe otiyo kit meno. 	As it is, you are looking for a way to kill me, a man who has told you the truth that I heard from God
ucu bao maarro kello oyoo myerro giwang woko	wood shavings do encourage breeding of rats, it should be burnt
Dok owaco ni, “Abiporo ker pa Lubaŋa ki gin aŋo? 	Again he asked, “What shall I compare the kingdom of God to?
Iweny pe gin maber  	fighting is not a good thing
giteyo kama rem nyo okwot 	they cut or make superficial incision where it is painful or swollen
Dok dano mo acel i kin lupwonnyene owacce ni, “Ladit, koŋ iwek aciyik wora.” 	Jesus replied, “Foxes have dens and birds have nests, but the Son of Man has no place to lay his head.”
mul ibin kany 	crawl and come here 
Wora bimare, wabibino bote, wabiyubo kabedo piwa kenwa bote. 	Jesus replied, “Anyone who loves me will obey my teaching
nyaarre dong odin ni yuk mitto anyaarra 	her pubic region is now overgrown with hairs it should be trimmed or shaved
wii worru  	give due respect and honour to your father
Ka giliro dano i ceŋ cabit, wek cik pa Moses pe oballe, piŋo iwu waŋ i koma pi caŋo dano i ceŋ cabit? 	Yet, because Moses gave you circumcision (though actually it did not come from Moses, but from the patriarchs), you circumcise a boy on the Sabbath.
tye ka Mune i Kampala labongo tic mo 	roaming about without any job in Kampala
Pe wuŋeyo ni wun aye wubedo ot pa Lubaŋa me woro en, dok Cwiny pa Lubaŋa bedo i iwu? 	Don’t you know that you yourselves are God’s temple and that God’s Spirit dwells in your midst?
Atitti ni, pe ibia ki kunnu nio ka iculo ducu ma wi cente mo pe orem.”	I tell you, you will not get out until you have paid the last penny.”
Kadi en obedo Wod pa Lubaŋa, yam en opwonnye me bedo ki winy pi can ma en doŋ oneno.	Son though he was, he learned obedience from what he suffered
gaa ma binno ka banno bataniya matye wokoni wek oteer i ot 	who is coming to fold the blanket which is outside and take it into the house
yatte merino kom  	the medicine enervates the body
Marita obedo ka poko cam, Lajaro onoŋo ŋat acel i kin jo ma obedo kwede i dog cam. 	Here a dinner was given in Jesus’ honor
nyac dong i kare man pe makko dano 	nowadays, people are not being infected with yaws 
Dano mo pe ma otwero dokke iye lok mo kadi ki acel, dok cakke i kare meno ŋat mo pe oette me penye ki kit peny mo.	If then David calls him ‘Lord,’ how can he be his son?”
ocammo dek ci obwotte cam mogo 	he ate the food but he left some for him 
Ka giketogi i dyere, gupenyogi ni, “Wun wutiyo man pi kit tek aŋo, nyo pi nyiŋ aŋa?” 	They had Peter and John brought before them and began to question them: “By what power or what name did you do this?”
nio ka abimiyo lukworri doko kom me teno tyeni.’ 	until I make your enemies a footstool for your feet.”’
watye ki cupuria mola 	we have a copper saucepan 
ni, atye ki cwercwiny madit kun cwinya rem mada ma pe jukke. 	neither height nor depth, nor anything else in all creation, will be able to separate us from the love of God that is in Christ Jesus our Lord.
min badde woko kiwok i geye ka dong itwee cingge igeye kuno 	twist the arms and then take them behind and tie the hands therefore
ka gwenynyo ki dakone, ci yimmo kor dakone ki adong matek adada  	when fighting with his wife, he gives a mighty blow to her chest
pe giwiyo uci, dok bene pe gicweyo boŋo	They do not labor or spin
Lujudaya guwaco ni, “En binekke kene, pien owaco ni, ‘Ka ma acito iye wun pe wutwero bino iye’?” 	Where I go, you cannot come.”
Adada awacciwu ni, i kabedo ducu ma i wi lobo ma gibitito iye lok me kwena maber, gin ma dako-ni otiyo bene gibitito pire, wek obed me po en.” 	Truly I tell you, wherever the gospel is preached throughout the world, what she has done will also be told, in memory of her.”
maarro tukko odilo twatwal 	likes playing football very much 
Ker ka opokke aryo, ker meno pe twero cuŋ. 	If a kingdom is divided against itself, that kingdom cannot stand.
pe ber ka itye ka pitto pamba me pikko gi kacel twatwal 	it is not good to plant the cotton closely
ngat ma tammoni en aye latek ci okatti opee twon dyang man 	anybody who thinks that he is very strong let him come and pull this bull 
Ento Marita onoŋo obedo ka canne ki tic mapol	But Martha was distracted by all the preparations that had to be made
latin tye ka cuur mada 	the child is groaning very much 
wangge obeddo ni ngolo nolo 	his eyes are very large and big 
Ocikogi ni, “Ento koni, ŋat ma tye ki kicaa lim, myero oter, ki opiro bene kit meno. Ŋat ma pe ki pala lucwan myero ocat kanyine, wek owil kwede, 	He said to them, “But now if you have a purse, take it, and also a bag; and if you don’t have a sword, sell your cloak and buy one.
dekke mit twatwal 	her the food was very nice
en dong okello ripot meegi pi gin angoo ma omiyo litino kwan gujemmo 	he has brought their report on why the school children rebelled
Cakke i kare meno Yecu ocako tito lok kun wacci, “Wuŋuti, pien ker me polo doŋ onyiko cok.” 	From that time on Jesus began to preach, “Repent, for the kingdom of heaven has come near.”
lak opilone oluu pe kwinynyo layata maber	the tip of the small pointed stick is blunt, cannot dig up the potatoes
lakac tye i poto ka kayo kal 	an harvester is in the field harvesting the millet
gwen laworo ocwee mada, nen yecgi ma opong i tee baraja en 	the white ants came out very much yesterday, look at how their shedded wings are full on the verandah
kun waleŋ, dok kitwa atir i nyime pi nino me kwowa ducu. 	in holiness and righteousness before him all our days.
twommo tyenne i kom ajut	to knock his foot against the stump of a tree
Omegine guwacce in, “A ki kany, icit i Judaya, wek lupwonnyeni gunen tic ma in itiyo. 	But when the Jewish Festival of Tabernacles was near,
anyeri cammo kal ni nyekke nyekke 	the edible rats gnaw or eat the growing millet slowly and continuously
Okot dong nyonggo kwene? 	where is Okot's residence, or where has he settled? 
Ite oyabbe woko ki te lebe bene ogonnye, ocako lok atir. 	At this, the man’s ears were opened, his tongue was loosened and he began to speak plainly.
Jo mogo i kin lupwony-cik gugamo doge ni, “Lapwony, iwaco kakare.” 	Some of the teachers of the law responded, “Well said, teacher!”
got dwong mada i burre ci pieno pe dong twerro gworre 	there is too much stone in the hole therefore it cannot be widened
ento gwokke ibed maleŋ. 	Do not be hasty in the laying on of hands, and do not share in the sins of others
gwokke mada ka itye ka lok kwede pien dogge aryo 	when you are talking to him be very careful because he is a double speaker
Kumeno Wod pa dano bene pe obino ni gitine, ento ni wek en aye eti ki dano, ki pi miyo kwone me koko jo mapol.” 	just as the Son of Man did not come to be served, but to serve, and to give his life as a ransom for many.”
Yecu ocwalo en wa i paco tugi, kun cike ni, “Pe idony i gaŋ kunnu.” 	Jesus sent him home, saying, “Don’t even go into the village.”
Dano me aryone obino, owaco ni, ‘Ladit, ciliŋ miya dok omedde iye ciliŋ miya abic mukene.’ 	“The second came and said, ‘Sir, your mina has earned five more.’
Ka ceŋ doŋ mito poto, dano ducu ma tye ki lutwo, ma twogi patpat, gukelogi bote. Oketo ciŋe i kom ŋat acel acel ki i kingi ocaŋogi. 	At sunset, the people brought to Jesus all who had various kinds of sickness, and laying his hands on each one, he healed them.
tur yat dong tye ka gammo 	the flowers of the trees are opening up, about to blossom
Ajwagi pa Jeuc ma gitye ki ot woro jokgi i nyim gaŋ gukelo twon ma gideyo ki ature i dog gaŋ gimito tyero gitum kacel ki lwak. 	The priest of Zeus, whose temple was just outside the city, brought bulls and wreaths to the city gates because he and the crowd wanted to offer sacrifices to them.
ka latin dag cam kombedi koni bicammone 	if the child does not like to eat now, he will have to eat it later 
Pi niye Yucepu, i agikki me kwone, oloko pi a pa jo Icrael ki i Ejipt, ka doŋ ociko pi kit macalo myero gibiyike kwede. 	By faith Joseph, when his end was near, spoke about the exodus of the Israelites from Egypt and gave instructions concerning the burial of his bones.
ka gimitti gweni pe gunog twoo alilii ci myerro gin ducu gigwergi ki yat 	if the chicken are to be prevented from getting the disease then all of them must be immunised
tiyo tic matek yonggo kom dano 	working hard weakens the body
Pe doŋ myero wakweru Katowa ki tobi macon, en tobi me raccwiny ki tim mogo maraco, ento myero wakweru ki mugati ma tobi pe iye, ma en aye leŋ ic ki ada. 	Therefore let us keep the Festival, not with the old bread leavened with malice and wickedness, but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth.
tyek tic mudong manokki 	complete the remaining work 
Wuleg wek ŋwecwu pe otimme i cwir nyo i ceŋ cabit. 	Pray that your flight will not take place in winter or on the Sabbath.
piyo latin ni ogoo lawotte	to persuade the child to beat his friend
Ki wun bene ka ce wuneno gin magi ducu, ci wuŋe ni en doŋ tye cok, tye wa i doggola. 	Even so, when you see all these things, you know that it is near, right at the door.
jalle dong orii mada ka pwonno muyembe 	the fellow has taken too long to pluck the mangoes
onynyo cam ki gweno 	giving food to the chicken
meno en aye caden ma yam gimiyo i karene kikome. 	who gave himself as a ransom for all people
Latinna, in doŋ itim tek i kica ma gimiyowa i Kricito. 	The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit.
Luparicayo ki lupwony-cik mogo ma gua ki i Jerucalem gucokke bot Yecu. 	The Pharisees and some of the teachers of the law who had come from Jerusalem gathered around Jesus
Wun Luparicayo ma lutowaŋ! Mukwoŋo myero koŋ wulwok i kikopo ki i caani obed leŋ, ka wek ŋeye bene obed leŋ. 	“Woe to you, teachers of the law and Pharisees, you hypocrites! You clean the outside of the cup and dish, but inside they are full of greed and self-indulgence.
beddo akera macallo i gang pa Rwot Okello	I cannot bear living submissively as they live in Chief Okello's home
Ento Paulo owaco botgi ni, “Gityeko goyowa i nyim lwak, ma peya giŋolliwa kop, ma wan Luroma, doŋ gitweyowa i i mabuc, ka kombeddi dok gigonyowa muŋ? Pe	But Paul said to the officers: “They beat us publicly without a trial, even though we are Roman citizens, and threw us into prison
Iyo, pud dok abibedo ki yomcwiny. Pien aŋeyo maber ni, pi legawu ki pi kony ma a ki bot Cwiny Maleŋ pa Yecu Kricito, bimiyo abwot ki i can. 	The former preach Christ out of selfish ambition, not sincerely, supposing that they can stir up trouble for me while I am in chains.
pien ada awacciwu ni, pe wubiwoto i gaŋi me Icrael wurumo woko ducu, ma noŋo peya Wod pa dano obino. 	Truly I tell you, you will not finish going through the towns of Israel before the Son of Man comes.
laora en aye opokko gangwa ki meeggi 	a river or a brook which has separated our homes and theirs 
polic gitye ka dorre 	the police are drilling 
Ogamo ni, “Amako lok magi ducu cakke wa ka tinona.” 	“All these I have kept since I was a boy,” he said.
nid toile matek 	tie the rope very tightly 
gingolle cul me dyel aryo  	he was fined or ask to pay two goats
Pe wuŋeyo ni komwu aye obedo dul kom Kricito? Nen myero ka akwanyo dul kom Kricito, aloko odoko dul kom malaya? Pe twerre! 	Do you not know that your bodies are members of Christ himself? Shall I then take the members of Christ and unite them with a prostitute? Never!
Pien Lubaŋa mito ni wuti gin ma atir, wek wumi jo mamiŋ ma gikwiya piny guliŋ woko. 	or to governors, who are sent by him to punish those who do wrong and to commend those who do right.
umme oding woko pe cwakke 	he has blocked nose therefore he cannot draw in air through the nose  
Gucako penyo Yecu ni, “Piŋo lupwony-cik guwacci, Elia aye koŋ kwoŋo bino?” 	And they asked him, “Why do the teachers of the law say that Elijah must come first?”
man gin aye lureka ma gitye ka rekko piny kany 	these are the informants or spies who are going round the various places getting information 
Ŋat acel i kin lupwonnye, en ma Yecu maro, onoŋo obuto cok ki kor Yecu. 	His disciples stared at one another, at a loss to know which of them he meant.
anyogine gipitto opikke woko 	the maize was planted too closely 
cacce kwede in keni 	struggle with it or fight with it alone 
Cutcut gigonyo lumalaika aŋwen ca, kun onoŋo doŋ giyubogi pi kare meno kikome, pi cawa meno, i nino meno, i dwe-nu me mwaka meno, wek gunek dul acel me adek pa dano ducu. 	And the four angels who had been kept ready for this very hour and day and month and year were released to kill a third of mankind.
baar yen man me teddo 	split this firewood for cooking 
ngoo ma beddo ni wece wece i tee lummi? 	what is it that is rustling under the grass? 
yen ma gitweyo ma gitinggo i wic yegge ni niki niki 	the tied pieces of wood carried on the head shakes to and fro
Lupwonnye meno gudok paco. 	(They still did not understand from Scripture that Jesus had to rise from the dead.)
kun giboko lok kekengi i kom gin ma otimme. 	Now that same day two of them were going to a village called Emmaus, about seven miles from Jerusalem.
Dok bene en pe odonyo me mine kene kare ki kare calo ajwaka madit ma donyo i kabedo maleŋ mwaka ki mwaka, kun tero remo ma pe remone kikome. 	Nor did he enter heaven to offer himself again and again, the way the high priest enters the Most Holy Place every year with blood that is not his own.
pi lok angoo? 	for what reason? 
atii cak i kawa meri? 	may I pour milk in your coffee?
Ka gutyeko tito lok pa Lubaŋa i Perga ci gucito piny i Atalia, 	and when they had preached the word in Perga, they went down to Attalia.
Lok odoko dano, obedo i kinwa, kun opoŋ ki kica ki ada	children born not of natural descent, nor of human decision or a husband’s will, but born of God.
pe angeyo gin ma en mitto 	I do not kow what he wants 
Yecu ogamo ni, “In iwaco lok man piri keni, kece mono jo mukene aye gutitti?” 	Pilate then went back inside the palace, summoned Jesus and asked him, “Are you the king of the Jews?”
ka dong iwekko boma cikwny yoo tung lacam ma lac ma ocitto ni pok en aye ilubbi 	after you have left the town, take the road on your left hand which is wide and broad, and follow it
leg yoo wek akati 	make the way free for me to pass 
opotto otoo woko li lig 	he fell and lost his consciousness 
Lwak ki lupwonnyene mapol onoŋo gitye kunnu, ki lwak dano mapol ma gua ki i Judaya ki i Jerucalem ki i dog nam me Turo ki Cidon ma gubino pi winyo pwonnye, dok wek ocaŋgi i kom twogi	A large crowd of his disciples was there and a great number of people from all over Judea, from Jerusalem, and from the coastal region around Tyre and Sidon,
kama itweerro nenno lee mapol ma patpat en aye i ajwiya lee	the place where you can see a variety of animals is the place where they drink water
kal matye i koloni twerro larre ka gijubbo oyot oyot ma nonggo kot Dud peya omollo 	the millet in the papyrus mat can be saved if it is removed quickly before it is swept away by the rain
jwi jwi ci ongole ce chong pe neko	all the time ongole alone is sucessful; does Chong not ever kill
par twatwal pi potto peny meeri pe konyo 	pondering too much for your failure in the examination is useless
Ka dok odwogo botgi tyen me adekke, openyogi ni, “Wun pud wunino ce? Pud wutye ka yweyo bo? Doŋ otum, ki cawa bene doŋ oromo	Returning the third time, he said to them, “Are you still sleeping and resting? Enough! The hour has come
Oruko boŋo ma onoŋo giluto i remo, dok nyiŋ ma onoŋo gilwoŋe kwede en aye Lok pa Lubaŋa. 	He is dressed in a robe dipped in blood, and his name is the Word of God.
bit gwok ki ringo wek imak woko 	entice or allure the dog with a piece of meat so that you may catch it
Tyen mapol laŋolkop obedo ka kwero	“For some time he refused
Pi meno, wun wubed ma wuyubbe pien Wod pa dano bibino i cawa ma pe wutamo.” 	You also must be ready, because the Son of Man will come at an hour when you do not expect him.”
Lalo ot mabuc ociko ni gikel mac, ci odonyo i tyelo oyot kun kome myel ki lworo, oryebbe piny i nyim Paulo ki Cira. 	The jailer called for lights, rushed in and fell trembling before Paul and Silas.
Ento in, pwony gin ma rwatte ki lok ada. 	I hope to see you soon, and we will talk face to face.
Ento dano ma tito lok pa Lubaŋa loko ki dano kun doŋo niyegi, cuko cwinygi dok kweyo cwinygi bene. 	But the one who prophesies speaks to people for their strengthening, encouraging and comfort.
Yecu owacce ni, “Nyara, niyeni ocaŋi	Then he said to her, “Daughter, your faith has healed you
Atye ka winyo lok ni tim mo me kwele kwele tye i kinwu. Tim me kwele ma kit meno gire pe nen wa i kin jo ma pe ŋeyo Lubaŋa, ni tye dano mo i kinwu ma omayo ci-wonne ci tye ka bedo kwede macalo dakone. 	It is actually reported that there is sexual immorality among you, and of a kind that even pagans do not tolerate: A man is sleeping with his father’s wife.
komme wac pe mitto pur	he is very lazy, he does not want to till the ground
tye ka pangge ata 	he is just roaming about aimlessly with no job
olutto bogine i pii wek obkide ka dong elwokgi	he dipped his clothes in the water to be soaked so that he may wash them later
dano mapol mada i karre man tye ma manno lim ma gimiyo botgi me tic pi lwak 	there are a number of people who hide the money for themselves, which are given to them for public work 
Pien gibimiye bot Lurok, 	He will be delivered over to the Gentiles
man kono lakwaa agaa? 	what about him whose grandchild is he? 
wii worru  	give due respect and honour to your father
anyogi lye ka twii 	the maize is germinating
tye Iwak kit motoka ma pat pat mapol mada 	there are many varieties of cars 
jamine twerro nyubbe woko 	the things can be mixed up or his things can be mixed up
lapil pil pa lagada bit mada  	a splinter from the reed is very sharp
it male i ngee kana 	climb up on the back of a donkey 
gweno bukke i kweyo 	chicken take sand bathing by fluttering in it 
pul gireggo ci dokko odii 	groundnuts are ground to paste 
ocung twatwal wii ceng omiyo ocakko nyonynye ci opotto piny 	he stood too long in the sun and that made him sink slowly and collapse on the ground
Meno doŋ omoko piwa lok ma yam lunebi guloko. Wun bene myero wuket cwinywu i lokgi, pien lokgi-ni bedo macalo tara ma lyel i latwok bene oryeny, omenyo cwinywu. 	We also have the prophetic message as something completely reliable, and you will do well to pay attention to it, as to a light shining in a dark place, until the day dawns and the morning star rises in your hearts.
Wun jo mubolo laremwu woko. Pe wuŋeyo ni, mako larem ki lobo miyo dano doko lakwor pa Lubaŋa? Pi meno, ŋat ma mito mako larem ki lobo lokke kene doko lakwor pa Lubaŋa. 	You adulterous people, don’t you know that friendship with the world means enmity against God? Therefore, anyone who chooses to be a friend of the world becomes an enemy of God.
anenne laworo ka bino i cuk 	I saw him yesterday when he was coming to the market
maarro latinne mada 	loves his child very much 
Paulo odok iye ni, “Wun wumito gin aŋo, ma wukok wubalo ki cwinya-ni? An pe ayubbe pi mabuc keken, ento wa pi to i Jerucalem pi nyiŋ Rwot Yecu.” 	Then Paul answered, “Why are you weeping and breaking my heart? I am ready not only to be bound, but also to die in Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus.”
I kare meno Yecu owaco bot lwak ni, “Wubino bota ki pala lucwan ki odoogu me maka, macalo wubino i kom layak? Abedo ka pwony i ot pa Lubaŋa jwijwi, ci pe yam wumaka do. 	In that hour Jesus said to the crowd, “Am I leading a rebellion, that you have come out with swords and clubs to capture me? Every day I sat in the temple courts teaching, and you did not arrest me.
okwata wangge ogollo 	the kite has deep seated eyes
Ci oryebo meja pa lulok cente, ki kom pa lucat amam	He overturned the tables of the money changers and the benches of those selling doves
Ento wun wubilimo tek ka Cwiny Maleŋ bibino i komwu, ci wubibedo lucadenna i Jerucalem ki i Judaya ducu ki i Camaria, wa i agikki lobo ducu.” 	But you will receive power when the Holy Spirit comes on you; and you will be my witnesses in Jerusalem, and in all Judea and Samaria, and to the ends of the earth.”
gucunne woko I kingi kengi ni gin ducu gibikwerro woko ni pe gin ma gikwallo kwoo kuno 	they discussed among themselves and agreed to say that they were not the people who stole there   
acut pe pye ata	vultures do not alight anyhow
anyogi twerro pitte kany  	maize can be planted here
litino gitye ka bitto nyim 	the children are splitting open the simsim pods,
lok ma kitmeno guddo cwinynye marac mada 	such matter affects him very badly
Mumiyo i kare ducu en tye ki twer me laro jo ma nyiko cok bot Lubaŋa, kun giwok ki bote, pien en bedo kwo kare ducu ka bako doge pigi. 	Therefore he is able to save completely[c] those who come to God through him, because he always lives to intercede for them.
tyen komme lege-lege koni poto woko ka ibeddo lye	the chair's legs are loose fixed it may collapse if you sit on it
Doŋ tuŋ lee apar ma ineno ca, gin kacel ki lee gibikwero dako-nu ma lakwele-ni woko	The beast and the ten horns you saw will hate the prostitute
pe i tuc tyen leela 	don't pierce the bicycle tyre 
Wun bene wucaden, pien wubedo bota nia i acakki.	“When the Advocate comes, whom I will send to you from the Father—the Spirit of truth who goes out from the Father—he will testify about me.
per lok ki lacoone  	talk a lot to the man
cittu ka tukko woko 	go to play outside 
Ka kun coyo, kodi mogo okir i ŋet yo, winyo gubino gucamo woko. 	As he was scattering the seed, some fell along the path, and the birds came and ate it up.
parro mada ka latin tye ka kwan maber	worries very much if the child is studying well
miyo cam ki dano 	to give food to the people 
Doŋ ka otyeko rok abiro ma i lobo Kanaan-ni woko, ci omiyogi lobo meno me bedo megi pi mwaka ma romo miya aŋwen ki pyerabic. 	and he overthrew seven nations in Canaan, giving their land to his people as their inheritance.
niag gin ma gititi maber ma pud peya idok iye 	do understand very well what you are told before answering
Dok apenyo ni, “Jo Icrael yam guyokke gumito poto woko piny?” Pe kumeno! Pi balgi omiyo larre bene doŋ obino bot Lurok, wek omi nyeko omak jo Icrael. 	as it is written: “God gave them a spirit of stupor, eyes that could not see and ears that could not hear, to this very day.”
Ki me aryone ma rom kwede en ene ni, Mar lawoti macalo imarre keni. 	This is the first and greatest commandment.
acitto i London ci atammoni gwoknyo atwerro corn ki Jon 	I went to London and expected that to meet John
In iŋeyo cik, ni, ‘Pe ineki, Pe itim abor, Pe ikwal gin mo, Pe ibed caden me goba, Pe ibed, Pe ibum dano mo, Wor woru ki meni.’ ” 	You know the commandments: ‘You shall not murder, you shall not commit adultery, you shall not steal, you shall not give false testimony, you shall not defraud, honor your father and mother.’”
tek okello buk cen ci pe dong gigoye 	once he brings the book, he will not be caned
pe konynyo larro lok ki lacoone pien cerro lok twatwal pi tam meere 	stirring up the millet which is spread in the compound so that it can dry
obollo ringone ma en lye ka cammone ki gwok 	he threw away the meat which he was eating to the dog
Kit meno utmegina, wudi cwinywu nio waŋ ma Rwot bidwogo. Wunen koŋ kit ma lapur kuro kwede gin ma pire tek ma cek i lobo	Be patient, then, brothers and sisters, until the Lord’s coming
goyo dano i gin ma kitmeno pe ber 	leaving some people on a matter like that is not good 
dano maarro ic ma onat 	people like flat abdomen
lak myerro gijwayo nino ducu wek pe obed ma gwee nyo otoppi 	the teeth must be brushed daily so that they may not smell or get rotten
Man aye lanyut me cal me kare man. Man te lokke ni, mot ki gitum ma gityero bot Lubaŋa pe twero miyo ŋat mo ma woro Lubaŋa doko dano ma cwinye leŋ, 	This is an illustration for the present time, indicating that the gifts and sacrifices being offered were not able to clear the conscience of the worshiper.
gucoko ŋide cam ma oloyogi, oromo adita abiro mupoŋ. 	They all ate and were satisfied
ka ngat ma mitto ngeyo nywalle, too, ki ceer pa Yecu ci myerro okwan Jiri  	if one wants to know the birth, death and rising up of Jesus he must read The New Testament
ringo me abulla keken	the meat is for grilling
juk pa luditto, geggo bulu me timmo gin maraca 	dissuasions of the elders prevent youths from doing wrong things
ka pe kong iloggo cinggi, ci pe icit ka cam	if you have not washed your hands, do not go to eat  
ot man dok ocudu katto maca  	this house is bigger than the other one
en aye gin mumiyo atye ki miti me tito lok me kwena maber botwu bene wun jo ma wubedo i Roma.	I long to see you so that I may impart to you some spiritual gift to make you strong—
marro mat mukato kare woko  	likes drinking or smoking very much
pik pil i agulo me amatta 	fill the pot with water for drinking 
Iyo, i kare meno abionyo Cwiny mera wa i kom luticca ma co ki ma mon, ci gibitito lokka. 	Even on my servants, both men and women, I will pour out my Spirit in those days, and they will prophesy.
Gin jami mapol madoŋo macalo meno otimme botwu nono? I adane onoŋo otimme ki tyen lok! 	Are you so foolish? After beginning by means of the Spirit, are you now trying to finish by means of the flesh?
Pien i cik pa Moses gicoyo ni, “Pe itwe dog twon ka tye ka nyono bel.” Lubaŋa mono tamme tye twatwal pi dyaŋ? 	For it is written in the Law of Moses: “Do not muzzle an ox while it is treading out the grain.” Is it about oxen that God is concerned?
dok bene bimiyo ticwu ducu mabeco me kit ma atir nya i komwu pi Yecu Kricito, kun kelo deyo ki pak bot Lubaŋa. 	so that you may be able to discern what is best and may be pure and blameless for the day of Christ,
cul me mucoro tye Mau alip abic 	payment for tax is five thousand shillings only 
adag wotto i yoo kama ajata dwoolye	I do not like to walk where there are too many muddy places
Litinona, pe wabedu ki mar i lok ma waloko ki dogwa keken, ento wamar dano ki mar me ada ma nen i tic. 	Dear children, let us not love with words or speech but with actions and in truth.
Ka doŋ lamalaika oa woko ki botgi, odok i polo, ci lukwat guloko kekengi ni, “Koŋ wacitu mono wa i Beterekem, wek wacinenu gin man ma otimme, ma Rwot otittiwa pire-ni.” 	When the angels had left them and gone into heaven, the shepherds said to one another, “Let’s go to Bethlehem and see this thing that has happened, which the Lord has told us about.”
tek pa motoka giporro ki tek pa agura gura, macallo man, motoka ma tekke rom ki tek pa agura gura 20	the power of a car is measured according to horse power, for example, 20 horse power car 
gin aŋo ma pud odoŋ?” 	“What do I still lack?”
Wuwek Lubaŋa doŋ oroc tam me cwinywu odok manyen,	when you heard about Christ and were taught in him in accordance with the truth that is in Jesus.
Lupwonnyene gudokke iye ni, “Lapwony, Lujudaya nene gimito celi ki got, in dok idok kunnu?” 	and then he said to his disciples, “Let us go back to Judea.”
dakone dong wotto mere lataya	his wife now roams all over, she is a prostitute
Kumeno ka gucamo otum otiŋo kikopo, kun wacci, “Kikopo man aye gicikke manyen i remona ma oo piwu.] 	In the same way, after the supper he took the cup, saying, “This cup is the new covenant in my blood, which is poured out for you.
I amitto maraya me nenno ki yer wiya 	I want a minor for looking at my hair
opici meerri dong jami oket lye ata	things are scattered all over in your office
pirro yoo gudo	to level the road 
Ento wun wukwero en Ŋat Maleŋ ki ma Kite Atir-ri, kun wulego ni omi botwu lanek, 	You disowned the Holy and Righteous One and asked that a murderer be released to you.
pul man catte maber mada 	all these things can be sold well 
palaa man lakke oluu, pe ngollo gin mo 	this knife is blunt, it does not cut anything 
mon mewa tye kwene 	where are our wives? 
Medo i kom meno myero en obed dano ma jo ma woko pwoyo, wek pe okel yet i kome ma miye poto i owic pa Catan. 	He must not be a recent convert, or he may become conceited and fall under the same judgment as the devil.
acikari guryeyo rek aryo 	the soldiers stood in two lines
marro gwello wangge ka lokko 	likes to open his eyes widely when speaking
Kadi bed gukelo lok goba kit meno, ento lok ma gukelo pe rwatte. 	Yet even then their testimony did not agree.
guribbe ka Iweny kom Woko 	they joined to fight Woko
oyo pii i poto gin anena	to pour water in the flower garden 
Lujudaya gugoya tyen abic ki del pyeradek wiye aboŋwen. 	To my shame I admit that we were too weak for that! Whatever anyone else dares to boast about—I am speaking as a fool—I also dare to boast about.
Ma ka timo kit meno, nen, dano moni dok pido ki ominne kadi wa i nyim jo ma pe guye Kricito. 	But instead, one brother takes another to court—and this in front of unbelievers!
Maliam Lamagdala ki min Yoce guneno ka ma giyiko iye kome.	Mary Magdalene and Mary the mother of Joseph saw where he was laid.
cany wiye ki lakkii 	hit his head with a stone 
jal cam ki lawotti dong ocam 	leave the food, which you also want, for your friend to eat
Wiwu pe owil ka jolo welo, pien jo mogo ma yam gugwoko welo onoŋo gugwoko lumalaika i pacogi kun pe giŋeyo. 	Do not forget to show hospitality to strangers, for by so doing some people have shown hospitality to angels without knowing it.
Nino ducu amiyo pwoc bot Lubaŋana pi kicane ma en omiyowu i Kricito Yecu, 	I always thank my God for you because of his grace given you in Christ Jesus.
en dong okello ripot meegi pi gin angoo ma omiyo litino kwan gujemmo 	he has brought their report on why the school children went on strike 
mon gubinno ma labeno ma gurukko belle abella 	the women came with the loin dresses, which they have worn, swinging about side to side
pol lokke ducu goba keken 	most of his words are lies only 
bammo agulu 	making the pot anyhow
myerro kong iwinynyo maber dok iniang maber gin ma gipenynyi iye ka dong icakko dok iye 	you must first listen carefully and understand the question, before you answer it and then you answer it
ka agalle, iŋe kit ma myero dano obed kwede i kin jo me ot pa Lubaŋa, ma en aye lwak jo muye Lubaŋa makwo, ma en aye obedo wir ki guti me te ot matek, me ada. 	Although I hope to come to you soon, I am writing you these instructions so that,
odoo la wiye oluto 	the stick without knob at the end
dano ma lanyab kom matto pii ki opado 	a lazy person drinks water with broken pieces of gourd
jalle dong orii mada ka pwonno muyembe	the fellow has taken too long to pick the mangoes
yimmo ter i wii dano 	placing a heavy load on the head of a person
kidi reggone twerro tyengge 	the grinding stone can be roughened
cwinynye ocung acunga i kom lok ma ititte 	he was doubtful about what you told him 
dano ducu ma i kacokke guciko waŋgi i kome. 	The eyes of everyone in the synagogue were fastened on him.
aduku man gicweyo maber mada	this basket has been finely weaved
Iwiny i tee pii wek ikwany caa meera ma opotto tye kuno 	sink under the water and get my watch which is there
myero wucit bot lucat-wil, ci wuwil mewu.’ 	Instead, go to those who sell oil and buy some for yourselves.’
cit ijol welo 	go and receive welcome the visitors
rut tiko magi me arukka ki tol man 	thread these beads for wearing with this thread
litino ducu dong wiigi ojanynye woko i kom lapwonygi 	all the children rose up against their teachers
yoo gudo mewa dong opong ki pony pony keken 	our roads are now full of potholes 
man tweggo lok mada 	this child though very young speaks very well
Guwaco ni, “Dok wamito caden me ŋo? Wan doŋ wawinyo piwa kenwa ki i doge kene.”	Then they said, “Why do we need any more testimony? We have heard it from his own lips.”
kelwa anyogi ajiya wek wamwoddi	bring us cooked dry maize so that we may eat it
Agripa owaco bot Paulo ni, “Itamo ni iloka adok lalub Kricito pi kare manok mo kuman?” 	Then Agrippa said to Paul, “Do you think that in such a short time you can persuade me to be a Christian?”
nyok dyel tye ka itto min dyel	a he goat is having coitus with or mounting a she-goat
jo Patiko gin aye gibeddo i tee got Ajulu	the people of the Patiko clan are the ones who live at the foot of the Ajulu mountain
lalele me kot ma ocweer madowong twatwal li oturo pem ci omollo woko 	the flood from the heavy rain that took place, broke the bridge and washed swept it away
nyutto cal ki dano 	showing picture to the people
nek gin marac mada 	to kill is a very bad thing 
latel wii dano 	leader of the people 
En yam pe oweko Wode kikome, ento omiye pi wan ducu. Pe bene doŋ bimiyowa jami ducu kacel kwede? 	What, then, shall we say in response to these things? If God is for us, who can be against us?
Man aye lok ma yam lunebi gucwako, macalo gicoyo ni, 	The words of the prophets are in agreement with this, as it is written:
en yee dano binno gangge 	he is very ngood, he accepts people to come to his home
Ka koŋo vino otum, min Yecu otitte ni, “Vinogi doŋ pe.” 	and Jesus and his disciples had also been invited to the wedding.
ruune ki gin ma itye ka timmone oyot oyot wek ibin 	hurry up with what you are doing so that you may come
yenynyo kolo 	provoking trouble 
otigo em dyang obino kwede ni yang yang 	he carried the heavy thigh of a cow and came with it shaking up and down
kongo dong ocek pien dong tye ka jibbo	the beer is now ready because it is bubbling 
Waŋ it acel twero mol iye pii mamit ki makecce? 	Can both fresh water and salt water flow from the same spring?
mutoka otwoorro but ot omuko woko 	the car knocked down the side of a house and broke it
Ento pire oywek matek makato, lwak mapol ocokke ka winye dok wek ocaŋgi ki i kom twogi. 	So they pulled their boats up on shore, left everything and followed him.
Ada awacci ni, pe ibikatti woko ki kunnu, nio ka iculo ducu, ma wi cente mo pe orem 	Truly I tell you, you will not get out until you have paid the last penny.
Dano twero loyo kit lee ducu, wa winyi, twol-gu ki ginaketa ducu ma bedo i nam, dok bene giloyogi woko yam con. 	All kinds of animals, birds, reptiles and sea creatures are being tamed and have been tamed by mankind,
Ŋat ma pe mara, pe mako lokka	My Father will love them, and we will come to them and make our home with them.
dakone lacaar caar	the woman is loose
tunynyo bye man woko	to break and scatter the earth of the anthill
Ipenya piŋo? Peny jo ma yam guwinyo lok ma awaco botgi	Meanwhile, the high priest questioned Jesus about his disciples and his teaching.
gitye kabeddo woko i tee baraja 	they are sitting out on the verandah
twee matek pe itwee logo-logo 	tie it firmly, not loosely 
obinno ma piny ribi ribi 	he came at dusk 
Gubedo ki lworo madwoŋ, ci gucako penye kekengi kun giwaco ni, “Man aŋa kaa, ma yamo ki nam giwinye-ni?”	They were terrified and asked each other, “Who is this? Even the wind and the waves obey him!”
me bedo ceŋ ma yabo muŋ bot Lurok, ki deyo pa joni Icrael.” 	a light for revelation to the Gentiles, and the glory of your people Israel.”
 pinne mono coron ki yugi ma gibollo ki i wiye malo kuno 	the water carries with it current faeces and rubbish thrown into it from its upper part
anyerri laworo pien pall ni dong mitto potto wokko ka iwotto 	I laughed at you yesterday because your trousers seem to be falling when you walk
gwokke mada ka itye ka lok kwede pien dogge aryo	when you are talking to him be very careful because he is a double dealer
ento lwak gumedde ki daŋŋe ni “Gure woko i kom yatariya, gure woko i kom yatariya!” 	But they kept shouting, “Crucify him! Crucify him!”
cot daba woko 	remove the mud
odir yukkungom ka gerro odde i ngom 	the cricket pushes up the earth when making its hole in the ground
ngatti mooni opyello kany ci owekko lwangi gunywal iye ma kwkiine dong beddo iye ni nyala nyala 	someone has defaecated here which made the flies to lay their eggs that have become larvae which are moving about in it,
nong kalam wek i coo kwedde 	find a pen so that you may write with it
litino pud gitye i tim ka cikko wino me makko winyo 	the children are still in the bush laying their traps for catching the birds 
en tye ka gecco lawiilobo mewa pi kwerro lokwa  	he is alluding to the head of our country for refusing our case
otweyo logo logo 	he tied it loosely, not firmly
laa ne twerro nyogge maber mada 	the leather can be rumpled, crumpled and tanned very well
dok bene ni, ‘Gibijoli ki ciŋgi, wek pe iyok tyeni i kom got.’ ” 	they will lift you up in their hands, so that you will not strike your foot against a stone.’”
Koŋ wunen winyo me polo	For where your treasure is, there your heart will be also.
Ento man aye lok ma yam lanebi Joel oloko pire kun wacci, Lubaŋa owaco ni, 	No, this is what was spoken by the prophet Joel:
Pien i kare ma dano gibicer woko, doŋ pe gibinyomme, ento gibibedo macalo lumalaika ma i polo. 	Jesus replied, “You are in error because you do not know the Scriptures or the power of God.
dakone lawol 	she is a person who always poisons people
Pien ajwaka madit acel acel giyero ki i kin lwak, ka gikete me tiyo tic i nyim Lubaŋa ma kakagi, kun tyero mot ki gitum pi bal.	Every high priest is selected from among the people and is appointed to represent the people in matters related to God, to offer gifts and sacrifices for sins.
Lurema, pe wuye kit cwiny ducu, ento koŋ wutemgi, wunen ka gin cwiny mua ki bot Lubaŋa, pien lunebi mapol ma lugoba doŋ guket gucito woko i lobo. 	Dear friends, do not believe every spirit, but test the spirits to see whether they are from God, because many false prophets have gone out into the world.
otany ka kokko ni pingo giyette 	he set furiously crying and asking why he should be abused
Owor ki luremme guitto got guo wa i wii lacol gotte 	Owor and his friends climbed the mountain up to its peak 
lyerro dano pi bal ma gutimmo marac	to hang people for serious crime that they committed
kweyo ka girubbo ki cementi ci beddo matek mada 	when sand is mixed with cement it becomes very strong
pak lyedi  	sharpen the razor
latuk ki cilo ki moo ma dong ockido kom bao doggola twerro jwaane maber mada 	the soot, oil and the dirt that has covered the door can be scraped and polished clean
litinoni gubino kany ci gutungi leyo aleya mere labolo matye wii meja 	the children came here and ate the bananas without asking for them
Lacen owaco ni, “Ŋat ma tye ki it me winyone, owiny.” 	Then Jesus said, “Whoever has ears to hear, let them hear.”
oyo pii i poto gin anena	to water the flower garden 
yee ni gitucce ki yat 	he consents to be injected with medicine
Koni atittiwu lok man ma peya otimme, wek ka bitime, wuye ni an atye. 	Now that you know these things, you will be blessed if you do them.
kello dek ma nok	not bringing enough food 
kom ot man twerro puune maber mada 	the walls of this house can be plastered very well
nyek meni pe meni	your step-mother is not your mother
cogi lyec or lyeci 	very big elephant 
Ka owinyo lwak tye ka mol ki ka ŋete, ci openyo ni, “Meno kono gin aŋo?” 	When he heard the crowd going by, he asked what was happening.
ngatimoo okatto kany laworo pien obot tyen tye ene 	somebody passed here yesterday because here are foot prints here 
Matayo ki Tomaci, Yakobo wod pa Alipayo, Cimon ma gilwoŋo ni dano ma mito locken, 	Matthew, Thomas, James son of Alphaeus, Simon who was called the Zealot,
Kit meno, ŋat acel acel i kinwa bidok i lok ma i kome pire kene bot Lubaŋa. 	It is written: “‘As surely as I live,’ says the Lord, ‘every knee will bow before me; every tongue will acknowledge God.’”
ento lupur gugoye, guryeme ci odok ki ciŋe nono. 	But the tenants beat him and sent him away empty-handed.
mon yonno gutgi mada ka gitye ka myello myel bwola 	the women move very much their heads forwards and backwards when dancing bwola
nyuny latin otti mo kany 	build your small hut here 
i ceng maditto litino cukul gikutto olwet ka gkiorre kwedde 	in important days the school children blow the bugles while matching
yatti twerro yette me bedo teke 	this piece of wood can be sharpened into wooden nails
nyonyo en aye gin acel ma gitiyo kwedde iyoo ma pat pat mada macallo magi gitetto me motoka, me luduko, me jammi me teddo ki mukene ducu mapol 	iron is one thing which is used very much in various ways like these
otuk ki ngwec cut i kare ma owinynyo lokke	he took off at once on hearing the news 
nyikke kany nyo nyikke tegge 	draw near or withdraw or move slightly away 
Kumeno, pe cuŋ i kom gin ma dano mito, nyo i kom ticce ma en canne pire, ento cuŋ i kom kica pa Lubaŋa. 	For he says to Moses, “I will have mercy on whom I have mercy, and I will have compassion on whom I have compassion.”
jamine pol mada 	he has many things 
pol tye ka ngabbe malo koni kot cwer 	the clouds are floating in the sky, very soon there will be rain 
gumiyogi waraga ma kwanne kit man ni, “Bot utmego ma Lurok ma i Antiokia ki Ciria ki Cilicia. Wan utmegiwu ma lukwena ki ludoŋo wamotowu mada. 	With them they sent the following letter: The apostles and elders, your brothers, To the Gentile believers in Antioch, Syria and Cilicia: Greetings.
pii ne tye ka cwiny maber 	the water is drying up well
Kit macalo ka yweyo doŋ pe i kom, noŋo kom doŋ oto woko, kit meno bene, niye ka pe giketo i tic, noŋo doŋ oto woko.	As the body without the spirit is dead, so faith without deeds is dead.
Gikelo dano ma yam waŋe oto-ni bot Luparicayo. 	“How then were your eyes opened?” they asked.
Orwone wapokke kwedgi, wacito i Cecaria, ci wadonyo i ot pa Pilipo latuc lok me kwena maber, ma yam en ŋat acel i kom jo abiro ca, wabedo bote. 	Leaving the next day, we reached Caesarea and stayed at the house of Philip the evangelist, one of the Seven.
tonggo gang 	starting a new home in a new place
pwacco kom pe ber	to lacerate the body is not good 
Adada, cik pa Moses yero jo magoro ketogi bedo ajwagi madito, ento lok me kwoŋ ma gikwoŋo lacen i ŋe cik, oyero Wod pa Lubaŋa oketo obedo muporre matwal.	For the law appoints as high priests men in all their weakness; but the oath, which came after the law, appointed the Son, who has been made perfect forever.
latin obeddo piny caa ni panyaka 	there is the fat well nourished child sitting
pingo dok wubeddo ki daa atata i kinwu? 	why must you now be quarrelling from time to time? 
En obako doge bote matek ni, pe myero ocwal cen maraco woko ki i lobo meno. 	And he begged Jesus again and again not to send them out of the area.
I kare me cer ki i kin jo muto, dako-nu bibedo dako pa aŋa i kingi? Pien gin co abiro-ni ducu gubedo kwede.” 	Now then, at the resurrection whose wife will she be, since the seven were married to her?”
Anek en aye lapit maber mada, nen man litino ducu ma en opittongi, gudonggo woko ducu mabecco mada 	Anek is the one who is good at looking after the children
gwerro kom pi twoo odyer 	to scarify(vaccination} against small pox 
Pi meno, Ladit Teopilo, ka doŋ aŋiyo gin ducu nia i acakki, an bene atamo ni bedo ber ka acoyo piri, kun aryeyo kikore, 	With this in mind, since I myself have carefully investigated everything from the beginning, I too decided to write an orderly account for you, most excellent Theophilus,
latinni dong komme onyabbe woko 	this child has now become lazy
lyak yat man dong olot oo wa i Icons ot 	the root of this tree has grown right up to the house 
Lubaŋa Wonwa ki Rwotwa Yecu Kricito omiwu kica ki kuc. 	Grace and peace to you from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
puny latin man okak mada 	the child's heel is very much cracked
Catan dok otere malo i wi got mabor adada, ci onyutte ker ducu ma i wi lobo ki deyogi ducu. 	Again, the devil took him to a very high mountain and showed him all the kingdoms of the world and their splendor.
Piŋo wan kono wacuŋ ka marac cawa ducu? 	And as for us, why do we endanger ourselves every hour?
cittoni kakwang tye awene 	when are you going to swim? 
En kikome onoŋo pe ceŋ, ento obino pi tito lok me caden i kom ceŋ. 	He came as a witness to testify concerning that light, so that through him all might believe.
Macalo litino ma luwiny, pe wumi kwowu orwatte ki mitiwu ma yam ko? wubedo kwede i kare ma onoŋo pud wukwiya piny ca. 	Therefore, with minds that are alert and fully sober, set your hope on the grace to be brought to you when Jesus Christ is revealed at his coming.
lapena en aye cam acel ma dano gimaarro cammone mada botwa kany ento ilobo Bulaya obeddo cam pa amam 	pigeon peas is the one food that many people here like to eat but in Europe it is the food for the pigeons
Pe wubed calo gin, pien Wonwu ŋeyo gin ma wumito ma noŋo peya wupenye. 	Then your Father, who sees what is done in secret, will reward you.
tye ka mukko yadi woko liweng ma otorre i dyekalle 	he is uprooting all the trees which are in his compound 
gucako yelo Paulo ki Barnaba ka guryemogi woko ki i lobogi. 	They stirred up persecution against Paul and Barnabas, and expelled them from their region.
pii pe mol dok tere	water does not flow upwards to the source of the river
In pe itye ki gin mo nyo dul mo i lok man, pien cwinyi pe leŋ i nyim Lubaŋa. 	You have no part or share in this ministry, because your heart is not right before God.
atin man ngibbo mungati agibba callo oyoo 	this child bites the bread bit by bit like rats
wang bao ma giribbo ka oribbe marac ci ngwec woko telokke ni pokke woko 	the joint of the wood plank if it was badly joined it comes slips off spontaneously
pi meno an bene cwinya yom kakare. 	The friend who attends the bridegroom waits and listens for him, and is full of joy when he hears the bridegroom’s voice
dano ma kitmeno ma yee ni bille tye twerro bille 	such a person who believes in charming can be charmed
lobo mewa ber mada me matapwali 	our clay is very ngood for making bricks
cittu ka lwerro pok tyang 	go to strip off the dried sugarcane leaves 
twoo dobo opotto i komme 	he is infected with leprosy
pi meno ŋat ma omiya boti tye ki bal madit makato.” 	Jesus answered, “You would have no power over me if it were not given to you from above
Kinaga twero donyo i waŋ libira oyot, makato lalonyo me donyo i ker pa Lubaŋa!” 	It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle than for someone who is rich to enter the kingdom of God.”
onang melo en aye kaka pa lagweegi ento en mere maarro beddo i ot pa dano 	gecko is a family ot lizards but it likes to live in the people's houses
tin gujwatte ki kedi ma pe wacce ki i olet 	today they beat one another with twigs in the grazing field
odyer en aye twoo marac mada ma nekko dano bene oyot oyot cakke ki lyetto ka lacen kom onynyo, en kom ma oonynyoni ka clean poyone beddo matwal i wang 	small pox is a very serious disease which kills people rapidly it starts with fever and then followed by rashes when these rashes heal they leave permanent marks on the face
kono ogoyo wiye woko ka pe onakke 	he would have struck his head if he did not bend his head away 
opotto ni cubu i pii 	he fell into the water with a splash
palaane lakke oluu nyo oligo 	the edge of the knife is blunt 
gitye i pee me dyangi 	they are pulling the cattle
Gin marac ducu ma dano timo, meno doŋ bal, ento tye bal mogo ma pe tero dano i to. 	All wrongdoing is sin, and there is sin that does not lead to death.
coo atir ma pe ngom 	draw it straight without being curved 
anenno tuko pa litino ma laworo ni obeddo mit mada 	I saw the play of the children yesterday, it was very nice indeed
ma pe lamero koŋe, ma pe lakolo, ento obed dano mamwol, ma pe da atata, dok pe obed ŋat ma maro lim. 	Now the overseer is to be above reproach, faithful to his wife, temperate, self-controlled, respectable, hospitable, able to teach,
puk con, odiko con, miyo imatto yamo magic mamit me odiko 	to rise very early in the morning is very good, it makes you breathe in the fresh, cold, nice air of the morning
Doŋ macalo Cwiny Maleŋ oloko ni, “Ka wuwinyo dwan Lubaŋa tin, 	So, as the Holy Spirit says: “Today, if you hear his voice,
poor bongo man ka rommi wek giwil 	try this cloth on if it fits you, may buy it
giputto gango nyo gitimmo gango 	the last funeral ceremony when shelters (bolo) which were constructed for the people, are now removed 
aballo i nyim Lubaga	I have sinned against God
Aŋa mono ma bipido ki jo ma Lubaŋa doŋ otyeko yerogi? Lubaŋa aye ma kwanogi ni kitgi atir. 	He who did not spare his own Son, but gave him up for us all—how will he not also, along with him, graciously give us all things?
en lakica mada, ononggo dako mo ma wot dong oloyo woko ci otinggo dakoni i motokane oterro wa i gauge 	he is a very kind person, he found a woman who could not walk, and he took her into his car and drove her to her home
I nino me adekke gucako bolo jami tic me mel woko i pii ki ciŋgi. 	On the third day, they threw the ship’s tackle overboard with their own hands.
yoo ocitto ni pok 	the road has gone on very wide and broad 
Pi niye Icaka olamo gum i kom Yakobo ki Ecau pi kare me anyim. 	By faith Isaac blessed Jacob and Esau in regard to their future.
Kombeddi pe mitte ki tuŋ bota me coyo botwu lok i kom mot ma gimiyo pi konyo jo pa Lubaŋa, 	Therefore show these men the proof of your love and the reason for our pride in you, so that the churches can see it.
lacoone kwoyo bongo maber mada 	the man is a good tailor 
“man aye gicikke ma abiketo kwedgi i kare ma abikwanyo balgi woko.” 	As it is written: “The deliverer will come from Zion; he will turn godlessness away from Jacob.
bura owotto ni Iwe Iwe ci otungi makko latin gweno ki inyimwa kenyo 	the cat came walking noiselessly and caught a chick just in front of us there
dakone maarro gwido lok ni put put ka gijukke timmo gin mo marac 	when the woman is stopped from doing something bad, she persists on talking for a long time 
lyerro otigo	slicing okra
kany ber rommo bedde iye 	here is very good it can be sat on
kal gioddo i pany ki lalekke 	millet is pounded in a mortar with a pestle
okwata maarro makko litino gweni mada 	kites do like very much to catch the chicks
twon gweno pe kok loka pa aya	a cock does not crow at Ayaa's homestead on the other side of the river
ringone ojing	the meat is very tough or hard 
yweyo tum tin 	the holidays end today 
Yam onoŋo wamito mada me bino botwu. An Paulo atemo tyen mapol, ento Catan ogeŋowa woko. 	For we wanted to come to you—certainly I, Paul, did, again and again—but Satan blocked our way.
dot lem cwarri nyo lem latinni 	kiss your husband or your child's cheek
dano ma mwol 	a gentle person
kic nangge maber  	honey can be licked very well
winy gin monni tye ka rubbo jami i kutyclo kwica 	listen, something is knocking things about in the room there
I kabedo ducu ma yam en obino iye, i kin paco-gu, ki i gaŋi-gu, ki i kin caro, gipyelo lutwo wa i cuk-gu, kun gibako doggi bote ni oye wek gugud kadi dog ginarukane keken	And wherever he went—into villages, towns or countryside—they placed the sick in the marketplaces
Anwoyo lokka doki bot dano acel acel ma giliro ni, en doŋ tye ki banya me lubo cik ducu. 	Mark my words! I, Paul, tell you that if you let yourselves be circumcised, Christ will be of no value to you at all.
dano mukene gimaarro mada lok me gee i kom luwotgi 	some people like very much to use insinuating words against their companions
ngaa ma ngeyo cwiic wek obia ocwii remo woko ki i wii dakoni, ma barro twatwal, ki tung dyang 	who knows how to suck so that he may come and suck blood from this woman's head, that is giving her much headache, with the cow's horn
dano guile i komgi ci gugoyogi mada 	the people rose up against them and beat them thoroughly
ento ŋat ma yeto Cwiny Maleŋ pe gibiweko balle matwal, pien noŋo otimo bal ma ri nakanaka,” 	but whoever blasphemes against the Holy Spirit will never be forgiven; they are guilty of an eternal sin.”
Yam en Kricito obino otito lok me kwena maber me kuc botwu wun jo munoŋo wutye ka mabor, ki botwa wan jo ma onoŋo watye cok. 	and in one body to reconcile both of them to God through the cross, by which he put to death their hostility.
kun owaco ni, “Abitito nyiŋi bot utmegina, abipaki ki wer i dye lwak mucokke.” 	He says, “I will declare your name to my brothers and sisters; in the assembly I will sing your praises.”
tal ringo man me amwodda kombeddi 	grill this meat for eating now
gammo is tye ka yello dakone twatwal 	the woman is suffering very much because of being pregnant
laditti ogette woko i doggola, ci pe yee ni gatti mo odony iye 	the gentleman has stood on the doorway, and does not want anybody to pass through   
latin matidi me ride i kin ludito pe ber 	a young child pushing or intruding among the elders is not good
Myero gipwo Lubaŋa Won Rwotwa Yecu Kricito, Won ma lakica, Lubaŋa ma kweyo cwiny dano ducu. 	Grace and peace to you from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
tuka aci o an ki koma 	I should go myself
miyo cing matek	clenching the hand
Ka Rwot onene, kica omake i kome, owacce ni, “Wek koko obedi.” 	When the Lord saw her, his heart went out to her and he said, “Don’t cry.”
tang gwiny pa mon mogo dongo mada ma dong mitto genggogi wot 	some women have very big buttocks which almost seem to be preventing them from walking
cittu wucikel lagada me taddo kom ot me agerra 	go and bring the reeds for building the house 
pyerre opette  	she has a wide waist 
Yecu owacce ni, “Nen giri piny, niyeni ocaŋi.” 	Jesus said to him, “Receive your sight; your faith has healed you.”
yom cwiny oneko latina	Genorosity killed Latina
Pi meno, doŋ wubwot raccwiny ducu, ki kit me goba ducu, ki kit me adwala, nyeko ki kit yet ducu. 	She who is in Babylon, chosen together with you, sends you her greetings, and so does my son Mark.
mot mot ocero munu poto	steadily, steadily, that is why the white man did not fall down
ticce ongayo woko 	the work is too much for him 
tim ber ilwokka bongi meera ducuc tin 	please wash all my clothes today 
en biwotto ki in 	he will go with you 
en maarro latuny tong gweno keken 	he likes only egg yolk
Yecu onoŋo loko pi to mere, ento gin gitamo ni oloko pi yweyo me nino. 	His disciples replied, “Lord, if he sleeps, he will get better.”
jec en aye yat me nekko ober 	jeyes is the chemical which is used for killing mosquitoes
nyebbe ki lapwony	becoming used to the teacher
tidu poto goyo kano	when tidu falls, it smashes the kano
Ki ajwagi madito pa Lubaŋa ki lupwonycik ki ludoŋo bene guŋale kit meno kun giwacci, 	and saying, “You who are going to destroy the temple and build it in three days, save yourself! Come down from the cross, if you are the Son of God!”
ringone pe twerro gwekke	he meat cannot be divided or cut into very small portions 
Kono ceŋ wuŋeya, kono wuŋeyo Wora bene	You know the way to the place where I am going.”
Ci guporo lok kacel, guwilo lim meno woko ki poto pa lacwe-agulu, odoko ka yiko lurok. 	The chief priests picked up the coins and said, “It is against the law to put this into the treasury, since it is blood money.”
gwogi gitye ka itte 	the dogs are mounting one another 
tyen mutoka ojayo gee tyenne 	the wheel of the motor car passed or ran over his foot 
kun wapo i nyim Lubaŋa Wonwa i kit ma wuketo kwede niyewu i tic, ki kit ma wucanne kwede pi mar, dok ki kit ma wudiyo kwede cwinywu pi gen ma wutye kwede i Rwotwa Yecu Kricito. 	We remember before our God and Father your work produced by faith, your labor prompted by love, and your endurance inspired by hope in our Lord Jesus Christ.
cingge gic ka imakko me motte kwedde 	his hand is cold when you hold it in greeting him
lagoga nino ducu tye ki luremme mapol 	Owiny is a great comedian, he made us to laugh very much yesterday 
Otyeno ma ceŋ opoto woko, gucako kelo bote lutwo ducu ma komgi lit, ki jo ma cen marac omakogi. 	That evening after sunset the people brought to Jesus all the sick and demon-possessed.
itto wii leela 	mounting the bicycle 
garro tee lok 	to investigate 
lacoo ne twoo dok yello twatwal 	the man always gets attacks of sickness
pul gireggo ci dokko odii 	groundnuts are ground to paste 
“Lok man atittiwu kun pud atye botwu. 	These words you hear are not my own; they belong to the Father who sent me.
tyek kwanni ka dong ibin ka tic 	finish your study then come to work
yer wigi obedo calo yer wi mon, lakgi obedo calo lak labwor. 	Their hair was like women’s hair, and their teeth were like lions’ teeth.
wod pa Yece, wod pa Obed, wod pa Boaj, wod pa Cala, wod pa Nakucon, 	the son of Jesse, the son of Obed, the son of Boaz, the son of Salmon, the son of Nahshon,
gak ki kuno pe dong kiwoggi  	remain there do not return
obedo ka oyo mac kacel ki lutic. 	There he sat with the guards and warmed himself at the fire.
wotto ma nyedde anyedda 	walks in a certain way full of pride
Kit meno Lalevi ka oo i kabedo meno, onene, obarre okato ki i ŋete. 	So too, a Levite, when he came to the place and saw him, passed by on the other side.
Doŋ kit macalo bal pa ŋat acel omiyo kop oloyo dano ducu, kit meno bene tic me kit ma atir pa dano acel okelo loyo kop ki kwo pi jo ducu. 	For if, by the trespass of the one man, death reigned through that one man, how much more will those who receive God’s abundant provision of grace and of the gift of righteousness reign in life through the one man, Jesus Christ!
nino me abic 	the fifth day 
wii meja man twerro jwaane maleng mada 	the top of this table can be very well polished 
Pi meno atye ki gen me cwale botwu oyot, tek aniaŋ kit ma piny tye ka wot kwede ki tuŋ bota kany. 	For everyone looks out for their own interests, not those of Jesus Christ.
kulune opong ki acuur cuur ci pieno yeya pe twerro kwang katto iye	the river is full of rapids therefore the boats cannot sail through them
yabbo wii dako pa ngatmo 	opening the door of the wife of another person, means to commit adultery with the wife ot another person
Pi meno, myero wakonyu kodi jo macalo meno, wek omi wan bene wadok lutic wadigi i tito lok me ada. 	It was for the sake of the Name that they went out, receiving no help from the pagans.
lupwonynye pa Yecu 	Jesus' disciples 
Ajwaka acel acel cuŋ i dog ticce nino ducu kun tyero kit gitum acel-lu kare ki kare ma pe tye ki twero mo matwal me kwanyo bal. 	Day after day every priest stands and performs his religious duties; again and again he offers the same sacrifices, which can never take away sins.
okodo en aye ngat acel i kom lee matitino twatwal ma beddo madowong i kom lee ki gwogi ki i kom dano bene gicel gicel, ma kayo kom ci mokko iye, ka dong beddo ka cwiyone nio ka odokko madit ka potto woko, gitye kitgi ma pol, mukene gikello twoo 	a tick is one of the very small insects which lives in large number 
wii agulo ni umme mere maber 	the top of this pot can be well covered 
Piŋo pe wutwero ye ni Lubaŋa cero jo muto? 	Why should any of you consider it incredible that God raises the dead?
Ka doŋ agikki piny bio, ma Kricito bimiyo iye ker i ciŋ Lubaŋa Won, ma noŋo doŋ otyeko turo kit loc ki twero ki tek ducu me cwiny. 	Then the end will come, when he hands over the kingdom to God the Father after he has destroyed all dominion, authority and power.
Pien nen, kare bibino ma gibiwaco ni, ‘Tye ki gum lulur, kiot nyodo ma pe nywal, ki tuno ma pe gidoto!’ 	For the time will come when you will say, ‘Blessed are the childless women, the wombs that never bore and the breasts that never nursed!’
Iwok kommi 	take a bath 
We ka yerro gin ma en mitto 	he is choosing what he wants or selecting what he wants
pi ngoo in imaarro nyedde cen twatwal pi kare ducu? 	why do you always like to sit aloot away?
gwen odeyo ki i tee agulu 	remove with your fingers the corn crusts stuck inside the bottom of the pot
adyeny ber me byello litino i gee	protruding buttocks is very good for carrying a child behind
Ento Yecu owaco ni, “Ŋat mo oguda gire, pien awinyo tek oa woko ki i koma.” 	But Jesus said, “Someone touched me; I know that power has gone out from me.”
pe tye ki gubo me tinggo kicaa kado man 	he has no strength to carry this sack of salt
ber kica pa Lubaŋa aye mumi teko i cwinywa, pe pi cik me cam mogo ma dano ma gulubo pe gunoŋo iye kony mo. 	It is good for our hearts to be strengthened by grace, not by eating ceremonial foods, which is of no benefit to those who do so.
lokke twerro titte 	the case can be explained or his case can be explained
nyikke mot mot wudok ki neewu  	move slowly backwards
Petero ocako po pire, ci owacci, “Lapwony, nen yat oduro ma iceno-ni otal woko.” 	Peter remembered and said to Jesus, “Rabbi, look! The fig tree you cursed has withered!”
Ŋat mo doŋ pe bipwonyo lutugi, dok ŋat mo bene pe biwaco ki ominne ni, ‘Ŋe Rwot,’ pien gin ducu gibiŋeya, cakke ki i kom jo matino ma i kingi, o kwede wa i kom jo madito. 	No longer will they teach their neighbor, or say to one another, ‘Know the Lord,’ because they will all know me, from the least of them to the greatest.
wek yenynyo alii obeddi 	do not provoke quarrel or anger or do not annoy
dan ot opong ki obworopyen keken 	the angles of the ceiling of the house is full of cobwebs
an ma apokko nitingatine adek 	I am the one who sliced the bread into three
Mumiyo acikowu ni wugwokke, kun wupo ni yam abedo ka pwonyo ŋat acel acel i kinwu ma pe aliŋ pi mwaka adek kulu dyeceŋ ki dyewor kun akok ki pig waŋa. 	So be on your guard! Remember that for three years I never stopped warning each of you night and day with tears.
parro mada ka latin tye ka kwan maber 	worrying very much if the child is studying well
Pi meno alegowu, wulub kita. 	Therefore I urge you to imitate me.
Doŋ iŋut i kom balli man, dok ileg Rwot, wek ka twerre lok ma tye i cwinyi gitimi iye kica. 	Repent of this wickedness and pray to the Lord in the hope that he may forgive you for having such a thought in your heart.
Gimito neke woko, ento lok oo bot kapten me mony ni Jerucalem doŋ otugge woko. 	While they were trying to kill him, news reached the commander of the Roman troops that the whole city of Jerusalem was in an uproar.
Pe wumi Cwiny pa Lubaŋa okum, en Cwiny ma gimiyowu me bedo lanen ma gimwono woko doŋ i komwu pi kuro nino ma gibikokowu iye.	and do not give the devil a foothold.
wii ngadi orukko ki bur 	so and so's head is covered all over with infection, that is erupted all over 
two anyoo nyaa oyot oyot mada ka litino pe gigwerrogi 	measles spread very quickly if the children are not immunised
gin gumake bene, 	When they seized him,
gulunyo boŋŋine ki i kome, gupwode, gucito, guweke kun doŋ cok to. 	They stripped him of his clothes, beat him and went away, leaving him half dead.
Jo mukene gucako ŋulo laa i kome, kun giumo waŋe woko, ka gidoŋe kwede, ma kun giwacci, “In ma lanebi-ni, tuc ba,” ki lutic-gu gupoto i kome kun gipale ki ciŋgi. 	Then some began to spit at him; they blindfolded him, struck him with their fists, and said, “Prophesy!” And the guards took him and beat him.
onyetto laa ni rit 	he spat the saliva far off 
okwatend oloko ngeye ki polo	a kite turns his back to the sky
tyang ducu ma wapitto bene tye ka jwir woko 	the sugarcane which we planted also is withering away
tunggo lee woko ki i dog kulo	to stir off the animal from the river
Yocia onywalo Yekonia ki omegine, i kare ma giterogi woko kwede i Babilon. 	and Josiah the father of Jeconiah and his brothers at the time of the exile to Babylon.
dano ma Rwot doŋ pe kwano bal mo i kome tye ki yomcwiny.” 	David says the same thing when he speaks of the blessedness of the one to whom God credits righteousness apart from works:
Ka lalo mabuc oco ci onoŋo ni dog ot mabuc oyabbe woko tye twolo, owoto pala lucwanne kun mito nekke kekene, pien otamo ni lumabuc gulwi woko. 	The jailer woke up, and when he saw the prison doors open, he drew his sword and was about to kill himself because he thought the prisoners had escaped.
ento Lubaŋa pe ocwalo Elia bot ŋat mo i kingi, kono bot da to mo ma i Carepat i lobo Cidon. 	Yet Elijah was not sent to any of them, but to a widow in Zarephath in the region of Sidon.
dyangi gitye ka cam i punu 	the cattle are grazing in the' pasture
otigo manok tyekko kwon yee 	little lady fingers can finish millet bread 
lapwonynye maber nen nino ducu kitte ma beddo kwedde 	a good learner can be seen by how he behaves
putto gwana woko pe ber myerro ikwiny akwinya keken wek dok onywal mukene 	to uproot the cassava is not good, you should only take some of the roots but leave the tree there so that it may produce some more
Ker me polo rom ki kabaka ma yam otedo karama me nyom pa wode, 	Jesus spoke to them again in parables, saying:
ngadi gi dong gibeddo i cula 	so and so lives alone
In lamiŋ, imito ginyutti ni, niye ma pe ki tic konnye pe? 	You foolish person, do you want evidence that faith without deeds is useless?
Ŋat ma owoŋo lemi tuŋcel, lokke tuŋcel bene	If someone slaps you on one cheek, turn to them the other also
Pien ceŋ peya giniaŋ ginacoya, ni myerone ocer ki i kin jo muto. 	He saw and believed.
curuwal mabor en aye gilwongo ni ramtol 	a pair of long trousers is called ramtol 
gicwallo ki ngaa? 	to whom was it sent?
I dwe me abicel Lubaŋa ooro lamalaika Gabriel i gaŋ mo i Galilaya, ma nyiŋe Najaret, 	In the sixth month of Elizabeth’s pregnancy, God sent the angel Gabriel to Nazareth, a town in Galilee,
wun jo pa Kricito, ki Kricito pa Lubaŋa.	and you are of Christ, and Christ is of God.
Meno omiyo gicikke ma Yecu ocuŋ pire obedo ber makato mukene ca. 	Because of this oath, Jesus has become the guarantor of a better covenant.
Yam acoyo kodi, Apolo oonyo iye pii, ento Lubaŋa omiyo odoŋo. 	I planted the seed, Apollos watered it, but God has been making it grow.
gang cok kany 	the home is very near 
Pien i kare meno bibedo iye twon can madit atika ma yam peya onen i lobo, nia wa i acakki lobo ma Lubaŋa oketo-ni, nio kwede wa onyoo, dok bene pe binen. 	because those will be days of distress unequaled from the beginning, when God created the world, until now—and never to be equaled again.
Wucito kunnu kono pi?o? Wucito ka neno dano ma oruko boŋŋi mabeco? Nen, jo ma ruko boŋŋi mabeco noŋo gibedo i odi pa luker. 	If not, what did you go out to see? A man dressed in fine clothes? No, those who wear fine clothes are in kings’ palaces.
Ka en oo bot Cimon Petero, Petero openye ni, “Rwot, in kulu aye ilwoko tyena?” 	After that, he poured water into a basin and began to wash his disciples’ feet, drying them with the towel that was wrapped around him.
dano ma larut lok myerro pe beddo i kinwa 	a double dealer or a traitor must not be amongst us 
lokke twerro twekke	message can be sent or transmitted from hand to hand
onang nang nanggo labeddo 	the powers that the corrupt people eat without working for it
“Gin magi ducu ma wuneno-ni, kare bibino, ma pe gibiweko got acel mo ma ododde i wi wadi ma pe gibicoro woko piny.” 	“As for what you see here, the time will come when not one stone will be left on another; every one of them will be thrown down.”
I nino me agikki me nino madito, ma en aye nino madit, Yecu oa malo, odaŋŋe, owaco ni, “Ka orwo neko dano mo, en myero obin omat bota. 	What did he mean when he said, ‘You will look for me, but you will not find me,’ and ‘Where I am, you cannot come’?”
beddo ma omwollo tyenne 	sits with the legs well folded together
Gin ma atiyo abimedde ki tiyone, wek pe ami jo ca gunoŋ kare ma gimito wek gimi onen ni gin girom aroma kwedwa i tic ma ginyatte iye-nu. 	Why? Because I do not love you? God knows I do!
tim gin ma ngene 	do what is known 
Ka lwak guneno gin ma Paulo otiyo, ci gudaŋŋe matek i leb Likaonia kun giwaco ni, “Lubaŋa gulor piny botwa macalo dano!” 	When the crowd saw what Paul had done, they shouted in the Lycaonian language, “The gods have come down to us in human form!”
meeni tye kwene?  	where is your mother?
danone larony luwaddigi 	he is a man who always makes fun of his companions 
Ŋo ma yam oremowu makato lwak muye Kricito i kabedo mukene ducu? Gwok nyo man keken ni an yam pe abedo ka nurowu ki peko? Wutimma ber, ka ce onoŋo abalo pi koyowu woko kit meno! 	I persevered in demonstrating among you the marks of a true apostle, including signs, wonders and miracles.
piyo lapii wek mac opotti 	turning the wood drill at high speed in a hole in the wood so that fire may be produced from it
Kombeddi doŋ amiyowu, i ciŋ Lubaŋa ki i lokke me kica ma twero, miyo wudoŋo wubedo matek, miyo wunoŋo dulwu ki i kom gin ma Lubaŋa oyubbe me miyo bot jo ducu ma en olonyogi gudoko maleŋ. 	“Now I commit you to God and to the word of his grace, which can build you up and give you an inheritance among all those who are sanctified.
red matek ka wek guwiny 	shout very hard to make them hear 
mucuggwa ma tye malo caa bene twerro pwonne 	the oranges which are up there also can be plucked
Pi meno utmega, ma amaro dok ma aparo piwu twatwal, wucuŋ matek i Rwot kit meno, pien wun aye wubedo yomcwinya ki tok wiya me deyo, luwota. 	Therefore I am all the more eager to send him, so that when you see him again you may be glad and I may have less anxiety.
poorro kit yoo ma ngati mo timmo kwede	copying the way how one does it  
litino gitye ka cwiyo pii ki obot ki i agulu pii 	the children are sucking water with the hollow reed stalks from the water pot
“Wanoŋo ot kol giloro maber, kun lukur-piny bene gucuŋ i doggola, ento ka wayabo ci pe wanoŋo ŋat mo iye.” 	“We found the jail securely locked, with the guards standing at the doors; but when we opened them, we found no one inside.”
Lanenni me aluba myero obed lok me ada ma yam iwinyo ki bota, kun ilubo kwede niye ki mar ma tye i Kricito Yecu. 	And of this gospel I was appointed a herald and an apostle and a teacher.
poorro kit yoo ma ngati mo timmo kwede 	imitating the way how one does it
tin malo wek i ket wii meja kany 	lift it up and put it on the table here 
tye ka yelle mada me citto 	he is trying very much to go 
lakwelle myerro pe beddo i gang pien ballo litino anyira ma i gang 	a prostitute should not be in a home because she misleads the girls there
pe konynyo me jwatto Latin ma oballo bal myerro gipwony apwonynya wek pe obal dok aye 	it is of no use striking a child who has done something wrong with a twig, he should be taught against doing such bad things again
agak caga gollone tek mada	cutting the ostrich eggs into necklace is very difficult
Gibicuŋ wa cen pi lworo kit can ma giune kwede, kun giwacci, “Ai do, ai do! Ineno can ba, in Babilon, gaŋ madit dok matek! Kop ma giŋolo i komi doŋ opoto i komi lawaŋacel.” 	Terrified at her torment, they will stand far off and cry: “‘Woe! Woe to you, great city, you mighty city of Babylon! In one hour your doom has come!’
Lwitwu odony ocuŋ matek i kome, dok wubed macalo ot ma gigero i kome, ma wucuŋ matek i niyewu kit macalo yam gipwonyowu kwede, kun pwocwu bene medde ameda. 	So then, just as you received Christ Jesus as Lord, continue to live your lives in him,
Wan bene wakelo botwu lok me kwena maber ni, gin ma yam Lubaŋa ociko pire bot kwariwa, 	“We tell you the good news: What God promised our ancestors
Ajwagi madito pa Lubaŋa ki ludito me lobo Judaya gutitte pi lok i kom Paulo, ci gubako doggi bote, 	where the chief priests and the Jewish leaders appeared before him and presented the charges against Paul.
ceerro i pii wek rec gukat woko gimak  	Jesus raised Mary's brother from the dead 
inenno ka okecco mada ki judde pa dongge 	you will see if she is really angry by the pouting out of her lips
Wamito omo cwiny Rwot wek nyeko omake? Wan mono watye ki tek wakato en? 	Are we trying to arouse the Lord’s jealousy? Are we stronger than he?
Ka balgi doŋ okelo lonyo bot lobo, dok bene ka potogi okelo lonyo bot Lurok, berre doŋ bibedo rom mene ka gin ducu gudwogo woko liweŋ? 	Again I ask: Did they stumble so as to fall beyond recovery? Not at all! Rather, because of their transgression, salvation has come to the Gentiles to make Israel envious.
latin ocwiine kom minne 	the child clang to her mother 
Lamalaika mukene me adekke dok olubo korgi, kun loko ki dwan maloŋo ni, “Ka ce ŋat mo oworo lee-nu ki calle, ma noŋo giketo poyo i tur nyime nyo i ciŋe, 	A third angel followed them and said in a loud voice: “If anyone worships the beast and its image and receives its mark on their forehead or on their hand,
wot rue kombedi rac twatwal 	at present, the price of rice is very high
ogoye lakucel 	he beat him without him hitting back 
kwir twol kwotto tyen ka twol otonngoo, ci kwot malit mada 	snake's venom causes swelling of the leg when bitten by snake and it is very painful 
En mumiyo yam giwaco ni, “Ka ceŋ oito malo, otero opii mapol ma en oyako i lweny, ci omiyo mot bene bot dano.”	But to each one of us grace has been given as Christ apportioned it.
danone komme wac, winynyo awinynya ma mwa, lok me citto ka pur, ducu merino kome woko 	the man is very lazy, the meer hearing of going to cultivate, enervates him
aroma me tiyo tic pakaca pe dong weko acwee 	the suffering of working as a porter does not make me put on weight
tammo pi gin ma etimmo	pondering on what he did
wan bene waŋeyo ni lok ma en obolo obedo ada. 	This is the disciple who testifies to these things and who wrote them down
Pi meno amito wuniaŋ ni, pe tye ŋat mo ma Cwiny pa Lubaŋa telo ma wacci, “Yecu giceno;” dok bene pe tye ŋat mo ma twero wacci, “Yecu aye Rwot,” ento Cwiny Maleŋ keken ma twero miye eloko. 	Therefore I want you to know that no one who is speaking by the Spirit of God says, “Jesus be cursed,” and no one can say, “Jesus is Lord,” except by the Holy Spirit.
cob tic man ka dong icitti 	finish this work and then go
Ka lwak gukelo litinogi bot Yecu ni wek en oboŋ komgi, ci lupwonnyene gujukogi. 	People were bringing little children to Jesus for him to place his hands on them, but the disciples rebuked them.
danone pe mitto Lwow cee 	is he a man who does not want to be called? 
cung pamba i umme wek ojuk remo cwer i umme 	plug his nostrils with cotton wool to stop blood bleeding from his nose
jallo cam ki latin ocam 	leaving the feud to the child to eat
mony ocakke laworo i kin lobo aryoni 	the war broke out between the two countries yesterday 
Onoŋo Petero pe doŋ ŋeyo kit gin ma myero eloki, pien onoŋo lworo omakogi mada. 	(He did not know what to say, they were so frightened.)
paco dong oballe woko	the home is now spoiled  
wot ki kuc.” 	Go in peace.”
Ka ce inen Lubaŋa onyuto lok mo bot ŋat mukene ma obedo piny, doŋ dano ma nen tye ka lok ca myero oliŋ woko. 	And if a revelation comes to someone who is sitting down, the first speaker should stop.
okwata oceyo lagwee lamulu mulu ma ononggo tye i tee yat man 	the kite snatched away the shining lizard which was under this tree
en rokke rok kwene 	what tribe is he?
Ento guti me ot ma Lubaŋa oketo doŋ tye ma ocuŋ woko matek likiŋ, ma bene tye ki coc man i kome ni, “Rwot ŋeyo jo ma gin jone kikome,” dok ni, “Dano acel acel ma lwoŋo nyiŋ Rwot myero opokke woko ki i bal.” 	Avoid godless chatter, because those who indulge in it will become more and more ungodly.
Ento i kare ma onoŋo Yucepu pud tye ka lwodo lok meno ki i cwinye, cutcut lamalaika pa Rwot onen bote i waŋ lek, kun wacce ni, “Yucepu, lakwar Daudi, pe ilwor kwanyo Maliam me bedo dakoni, pien ic ma en tye kwede-ni obedo ic pa Cwiny Maleŋ. 	But after he had considered this, an angel of the Lord appeared to him in a dream and said, “Joseph son of David, do not be afraid to take Mary home as your wife, because what is conceived in her is from the Holy Spirit.
jalle ka dong ojany i wii komme, ci pe dong ngeyo gatti mo wacel 	when that man is sitting on his chair with an air of a chief, he does not care about anybody at all 
Ŋat mukene dok obino, owaco mere ni, ‘Ladit, limmi en, agwoko, aboyo i kitambara, 	“Then another servant came and said, ‘Sir, here is your mina; I have kept it laid away in a piece of cloth.
Yam wubedo colpiny, ento kombeddi doŋ wudoko dyeceŋ i Rwot	Therefore do not be partners with them.
Ma ka loko lok kit meno, onoŋo myero wuwacci, “Ka Rwot oye, wabibedo kwo, wabitimo man nyo maca.” 	Instead, you ought to say, “If it is the Lord’s will, we will live and do this or that.”
la iye onat cammo kwon yengkuu 	a person with the flat abdomen, even when she eats food she is not satisfied, that is, her abdomen does not distend
Wuŋeyo ni, pi lit koma omiyo atittiwu lok me kwena maber pi tyen mukwoŋo. 	I fear for you, that somehow I have wasted my efforts on you.
lamaarro icitto kwene? 	where are you going cousin? 
aita maarro gollo ngom mada me yenynyo kwedde nyig jami me acamma macallo pul,lyata ki mukene	the ground squirrel loves digging or making holes very much looking for things for eating such as groundnuts, sweet potatoes and others
Gin bene gibidokke iye ni, ‘Rwot, waneni awene ka kec neki nyo ka orwo neki, nyo ka i welo, nyo ka itye munero, nyo ka komi lit, nyo ka itye i mabuc, ci pe wakonyi?’ 	“They also will answer, ‘Lord, when did we see you hungry or thirsty or a stranger or needing clothes or sick or in prison, and did not help you?’
bongoni dong omakko lwala  	your clothes are soiled with red soil
Ento jo ma yam gibedo i Jerucalem, ki luditogi, onoŋo pe giniaŋ i kome, pe bene guniaŋ lok ma yam lunebi gutito ki ma gikwano nino ducu i ceŋ cabit. Ci gucobo lok pa lunebi kun giŋolo ni kop oloyo Yecu. 	The people of Jerusalem and their rulers did not recognize Jesus, yet in condemning him they fulfilled the words of the prophets that are read every Sabbath.
Cutcut gutugi weko yeya ki wongi Jebedayo, ci gulubo kore. 	and immediately they left the boat and their father and followed him.
en pe maarro beddo i tim	he does not want to stay away from home
tem latin meno twerro palle pien tukko twatwal I kilaci 	the child's cheek can be slapped because she plays too much in class 
Atito botwu ni, dano man odok i ode kun oloyo kop makato ŋat mukene ca	“I tell you that this man, rather than the other, went home justified before God
olwokko bongona	he washed my clothes
tye ka tangge caa pe mitto citto gang 	he is turning away, he does not want to go home 
olwa en aye yat matek mada me geddo ki jami mabecco me ot macallo kom, meja ki canduk 	this African oak tree is very hard and suitable for building and for certain things such as chairs, tables and boxes
Pilato owaco botgi tyen me adekke ni, “Piŋo kaa? Otimo kit gin aŋo marac? An gira pe anoŋo kop mo marac i kome ma myero gineke pire	For the third time he spoke to them: “Why? What crime has this man committed? I have found in him no grounds for the death penalty
yec del dyel man twerro cweerre maber mada 	the hair of the goats' skin can be well scraped
ngab wang guniya ma oyecci 	mend the hole in the gunny bag
Ka lupwonnye guwinyo lok man, ci guuro twatwal kun gipenye ni, “Aŋa ma dok twero larre?” 	When the disciples heard this, they were greatly astonished and asked, “Who then can be saved?”
Cimon ma yam obedo i kin jo ma gimito locken, ki Juda me Keriot, ma odobe. 	Simon the Zealot and Judas Iscariot, who betrayed him.
kal ojimmo i pato mape wacce 	the millet has grown bushy
jang yatte pe tye ka jany maber 	the branches of the tree are not spreading out very well by not putting out more branches
i agaki yoo ka inenno mac ma atworo ci katti ento ka mac ma kwar ci pe ikatti 	when you see a green light in a crossroad, do pass but a red light, do not pass 
Kit meno yomcwiny obedo dwoŋ i gaŋ meno. 	So there was great joy in that city.
winyo beddo ni puru puru ka cammo kal 	the birds are flying all around eating millet
Ka dano ducu ma i kacokke guwinyo lok man, kiniga omakogi matek. 	All the people in the synagogue were furious when they heard this.
royo tol i libira nyo i kinyo	to thread the needle
Ento Rwot ocuŋo ka ŋeta, ka doŋ omiya teko me tuco lok kakare, wek Lurok ducu guwiny	You too should be on your guard against him, because he strongly opposed our message.
umme tye ka cweer remo 	his nose is bleeding 
oenyommo nyaa pa Otto 	he is marrying Otto's daughter 
Gutwarre malo, gutere woko ki i gaŋ, gukele i wi got ma gigero gaŋgi i wiye wek gicore piny. 	They got up, drove him out of the town, and took him to the brow of the hill on which the town was built, in order to throw him off the cliff.
Apwoyo Luba?a ma atiyo bote tic ki iya maleŋ, macalo kwarowa yam gutiyo bote, kun alwoŋo nyiŋi i legana me kare ducu. 	To Timothy, my dear son: Grace, mercy and peace from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Lord.
otwonno latin otte maber mada i gut kulu 	he built a very beautiful small house at the corner of the river
wiye tye ka baare mada 	he is having a severe headache 
Deyo ma ceŋ imiya, an amiyo botgi, wek gubed acel macalo wan acel, 	For them I sanctify myself, that they too may be truly sanctified.
Onoŋo bene en geno ni Paulo bimiye lim, pienno obedo ka lwoŋe jwijwi ci boko lok kwede. 	At the same time he was hoping that Paul would offer him a bribe, so he sent for him frequently and talked with him.
Yamo madwoŋ ocako kodo, pii otwagge, ocorre i yeya, omiyo i yeya ocako poŋ woko. 	A furious squall came up, and the waves broke over the boat, so that it was nearly swamped.
awobine ber mada 	the boy is very charming 
pung doggola woko 	shut the door
okolok en aye kwidi madit dok mabor ma katto odag kidi, tye bene ki lwak tyenne mapol ata en aye wotto kwedde 	millipede is a bigger and longer insect than centipede, and it has millions of feet by which it crawls
Pien ker pa Lubaŋa pe te lokke cam ki mat, ento kit ma atir, kuc, ki yomcwiny ma Cwiny Maleŋ miyo. 	Therefore do not let what you know is good be spoken of as evil.
Rwot myero otim kica i kom paco pa Oneciporo, pien yam obedo ka dwoko cwinya tyen mapol. Lewic pe omake pi twec ma gitweya kwede ki nyor, 	You know that everyone in the province of Asia has deserted me, including Phygelus and Hermogenes.
En openyo ni, “Maa ki omega gin aŋagi?” 	“Who are my mother and my brothers?” he asked.
Gititte ni, “Yecu me Najaret aye tye ka kato.” 	They told him, “Jesus of Nazareth is passing by.”
Litinona, wugwokke, pe wuwor jogi.	Dear children, keep yourselves from idols.
Wun wuŋeyo ni gityeko kokowu ki i kit pa kwarowu ma pe konyo. Pe gikokowu ki gin ma balle woko, macalo ryal nyo jabu, 	for it is written: “Be holy, because I am holy.”
wotto ni tam-tam callo ngat ma omeer 	walks unsteadily or staggering like a drunkard
gukelo kana ki latinne, gupeto boŋŋigi i kome ka doŋ Yecu obedo i wiye. 	The disciples went and did as Jesus had instructed them.
Ka en owaco man, ci oywe i komgi, owaco ki gin ni, “Wugam Cwiny Maleŋ. 	Again Jesus said, “Peace be with you! As the Father has sent me, I am sending you.”
ci gimiyo pi poto pa lacwe-agulu ca kit macalo Rwot ocika kwede.” 	Then what was spoken by Jeremiah the prophet was fulfilled: “They took the thirty pieces of silver, the price set on him by the people of Israel,
owacca ni lok ma gilokko i kome ni lok goba 	he told me that what is being spoken about him is a lie
mon ononggo girukko ogul mola i gut cingi 	women used to wear copper or brass wristlets 
Ento Petero dok ogamo ni, “Kadi bed mitte ni myero ato kacel kwedi, pe abikweri.” Lupwonnye mukene-ni bene ducu guwaco kit meno. 	But Peter declared, “Even if I have to die with you, I will never disown you.” And all the other disciples said the same.
Yecu odok iye botgi ni, “Piŋo wun kono pe wulubo cik pa Lubaŋa pi lubo kit kwerwu? 	“Why do your disciples break the tradition of the elders? They don’t wash their hands before they eat!”
nio ka giketo kabaka mukene ma pe ŋeyo Yucepu. 	Then ‘a new king, to whom Joseph meant nothing, came to power in Egypt.’
obutto ma otullo dudde	she slept protruding her buttocks 
Yam gicoyo ni, “Pi lok man dano biweko wonne ki minne, ci giribbe woko gin ki dakone, gin aryo doŋ gidoko kom acel.” 	for we are members of his body.
I ceŋ cabit wacito woko i ŋe doggaŋ i kabedo mo ma i dog kulu, ma watamo ni gwok nyo ka lega tye kunnu	On the Sabbath we went outside the city gate to the river, where we expected to find a place of prayer
Pe wupo ni yam atittiwu lok man i kare ma pud atye botwu? 	Don’t you remember that when I was with you I used to tell you these things?
twon gweno pa ladiro odoko ler	Ladiro's cock became mere tendons
Kabedo ducu ma pe bijolowu, ma pe biwinyowu, ka ce wubia woko ki kunnu, ci wuteŋ apwa woko ki i tyenwu wek obed caden botgi.” 	And if any place will not welcome you or listen to you, leave that place and shake the dust off your feet as a testimony against them.”
poyo gweno 	a well growing, middle sized fowls 
tuno nya romo 	big conical breast with wide base 
pim me cello luduko 	to aim to shoot the guns
Yecu kun tye ka nene, owaco ni, “Tek mada bot lulonyo me donyo i ker pa Lubaŋa! 	Jesus looked at him and said, “How hard it is for the rich to enter the kingdom of God!
lak kweri ne dong elan nyo oligo 	the edge of the blade of the hoe is blunt
I oboke yat ma i pittoni obokke woko 	the leaves of the tree which you have planted have turned brown 
Ajwaka madit macalo meno aye ma romo cobo mitiwa. En leŋ, gin mo marac pe i iye, cilo me bal pe ogude. Yam gipoko en woko ki i kom lubalo, gitiŋe malo i wi polo. 	Such a high priest truly meets our need—one who is holy, blameless, pure, set apart from sinners, exalted above the heavens.
lyelle giyubbo ki mabul 	his grave is made of marble 
notto agulu mapud dyak ma gitye ka cweyone 	imprinting the wet pot which is being made with a pattern
wangge pe ber jami ma nenno dong nen miri miri 	his eyes are not well, all the things that he sees are blurred
pien tweerro daa kweddi pi lok mo ma teere pe	he is a peculiar because he can quarrel with you for no reason at all
ci gitiŋo komgi gidwoko cen i Cekem ci giyikogi i lyel ma yam Abraim owilo ki lim ryal ki bot awobe pa Kamor i Cekem. 	Their bodies were brought back to Shechem and placed in the tomb that Abraham had bought from the sons of Hamor at Shechem for a certain sum of money.
“Lurema, atito botwu ni, pe wulwor jo ma neko kom, ma pe dok gitwero timo gin mo makato meno. 	“I tell you, my friends, do not be afraid of those who kill the body and after that can do no more.
Lamalaika me abicelle okuto tumme, ci awinyo dwan mo ma a ki i twok keno tyer aŋwen me jabu ma tye i nyim Lubaŋa. 	The sixth angel sounded his trumpet, and I heard a voice coming from the four horns of the golden altar that is before God.
giteerro latin ka nakko lakke 	the child has been taken to have his tooth extracted
Lok magi ducu Yecu oloko bot lwak i carolok. I adane en pe obedo ka lok kwedgi lok mo laboŋo bolo carolok, 	Jesus spoke all these things to the crowd in parables; he did not say anything to them without using a parable.
tungwa tye loka caa 	our home is over (the river) there
dakoni tye ki monyo 	she has menses or she is menstruating 
cabit acel tye iye nino abiro	one week has seven days
gung piny ka i mitto legga 	kneel down if you want to pray 
Jo mapol bilubo kitgi me timo tim coco, ci bimiyo dano cayo yo me ada pigi. 	Many will follow their depraved conduct and will bring the way of truth into disrepute.
wugwokke ki Arweny mada ka wulokko pien en larut lok 	beware of Arweny when talking because he is a double dealer 
teer lamingi woko 	take the stupid fellow out
litino guo woko ni pep mape ononggo purl wayubbe me jollogi 	the children arrived suddenly before we were ready to welcome them
Pi meno, wumok i tamwu ni pe wubitamo con kit ma wubidok iye, 	But make up your mind not to worry beforehand how you will defend yourselves.
gweno obollo tong i lum kany 	the hen has laid its egg here in the grass
pai pai lim mada pi meno litino gimaarro cammo ne mada 	papaya is very sweet, therefore the children like to eat it very much
en mitto willo tunga labolo aryo	he wants to buy two bunches of bananas
Pi meno wucit i yo madito, wulwoŋ jo mapol ma wubinoŋo, wuwek gubin i karama me nyom.” 	“Then he said to his servants, ‘The wedding banquet is ready, but those I invited did not deserve to come.
yikko dano ma otoo	to bury a dead person
Jo magi giŋene maber pi niyegi, ento pe gumedo ki noŋo gin ma yam Lubaŋa ociko pire, 	These were all commended for their faith, yet none of them received what had been promised,
wacok jamiwa ka acel	let us collect our things together
lwak Bagicu dok col 	many of the Bagisu people are black 
gitye ka waddo lobo woko ki i wang pii 	they are removing the mud away from the water well
Man muŋ madit twatwal. An ki tuŋ bota agonyo tyen lokke ni Kricito ki lwak muye en. 	“For this reason a man will leave his father and mother and be united to his wife, and the two will become one flesh.”
unne me pitto litinone kene	to suffer of feeding his children alone 
wonne opillo wiye ki dyel i kare ma okatto peny 	his father honoured him by killing a goat when he passed his examinations 
Pi meno wan bene wanyatte piwu i kin jo muye Lubaŋa i kabedo ducu, pi diyo cwinywu ki pi niyewu i un ma giunowu kwede ki i can ducu ma wutye ka cirone. 	Therefore, among God’s churches we boast about your perseverance and faith in all the persecutions and trials you are enduring.
piyo lawotti me matto taa 	persuading your friend to smoke
Moses yam owacci, ‘Rwot Lubaŋa bicwalo lanebi mo piwu ma bia ki i kin utmegiwu macalo ocwalo an. Wubiwinyo en i lok ducu ma bititowu. 	For Moses said, ‘The Lord your God will raise up for you a prophet like me from among your own people; you must listen to everything he tells you.
bongo yer rug woko ka gilwokko i pii ma ngic 	a woollen dress shrinks if washed in cold water
dok bene pi Yecu Kricito myero en oti kwedwa gin ma yomo cwinye. Deyo obed bot Yecu Kricito nakanaka. Amen. 	Amen.
Wan aye lucaden me lok meno, kacel ki Cwiny Maleŋ ma Lubaŋa omiyo bot jo ma giwinye.” 	We are witnesses of these things, and so is the Holy Spirit, whom God has given to those who obey him.”
git jang yat man wek iteer icinek kwedde ki mac kwica 	tear off the branch of this tree and go and use it for putting out the fire there 
log wanggi ka dong kit ka kwan 	wash your face and then go to study
I oboke oluk ki toyo mape wacce 	the leaves are covered in dew
ento pi geŋo tim me abor, myero laco acel acel obed ki dakone, ki dako acel acel bene myero obed ki cware. 	But since sexual immorality is occurring, each man should have sexual relations with his own wife, and each woman with her own husband.
yatte oputte ni wele  	the tree was pulled out easily without difficulty
caak cupa kello twoo caddo ki litino 	bottled milk causes diarrhoea in children
Yecu odaŋŋe, owacci, “Ŋat ma ye an, pe oye an, ento oye ŋat ma oora. 	for they loved human praise more than praise from God.
Ci jo mukene i kingi lok ocobo cwinygi, guribbe i kom Paulo ki Cira, ki lwak jo Grik mapol ma giworo Lubaŋa, kacel ki mon madito madwoŋ. 	Some of the Jews were persuaded and joined Paul and Silas, as did a large number of God-fearing Greeks and quite a few prominent women.
dongo chi ni rap rap 	clapping the hands and making the sound "rap rap"
Lacen owaco bot Tomaci ni, “Cwal nyig ciŋi kany, inen ciŋa	So the other disciples told him, “We have seen the Lord!” But he said to them, “Unless I see the nail marks in his hands and put my finger where the nails were, and put my hand into his side, I will not believe.”
dakone dong pel pel mada 	the woman is very thin or his wife is very thin or much wasted 
Doŋ lok ma mako jogo lim me konyo jo pa Lubaŋa: kit macalo yam aciko jo muye Kricito ma gibedo i Galatia ni guti, wun bene wutim kumeno. 	Now about the collection for the Lord’s people: Do what I told the Galatian churches to do.
pe imoor wanggi i komma, an pe ma aballo 	don't look at me with menace, I am not the one who spoilt it
gimiiniwa dyel acel keken, an dong adyeri ni iteer	we were given only one goat, I offer that you take it
Maliam ori bot Elicabet dwe adek, ka lacen odok i pacone. 	Mary stayed with Elizabeth for about three months and then returned home.
Man en aye mar, pe ni wan wamaro Lubaŋa, ento en aye omarowa, ci ocwalo Wode me bedo gin me kwanyo bal woko ki i komwa. 	This is love: not that we loved God, but that he loved us and sent his Son as an atoning sacrifice for our sins.
Genwa meno pe kelo botwa cwercwiny, pien Cwiny Maleŋ doŋ omiyo gionyo mar pa Lubaŋa woko i cwinywa. 	perseverance, character; and character, hope.
Ka doŋ gukato loka ca, ci gukato wi tura i lobo Genecaret, gutweyo yeya kunnu. 	When they had crossed over, they landed at Gennesaret and anchored there.
tin guyette mada 	they abused or insulted themselves very much
wek lok pa lanebi Icaya ocobbe kakare, ni, “Rwot, aŋa ma oye lok ma watito? Dok aŋa ma Rwot onyuto tekone bote?” 	Believe in the light while you have the light, so that you may become children of light.” When he had finished speaking, Jesus left and hid himself from them.
ginekko lulibbo aryo ma ononggo gitye I wii ot ma gimitto cello won kom me Kacokke Madit 	two snipers were killed yesterday who were on top of a root waiting to shoot the Speaker of Parliament
Ojwinyojwiny aryo pe gicato pi cente apar? Ento mo acel pe poto piny i ŋom ma Wonwu pe ŋeyo. 	Are not two sparrows sold for a penny? Yet not one of them will fall to the ground outside your Father’s care.
nenne kwedde ki wiye ma obeddo arot arot 	look at him with his deformed oval head!
Ki tuŋ bot Daudi kikome en dok oloko i tek pa Cwiny Maleŋ ni, ‘Rwot owaco bot Rwoda ni, Bed i kom bada ma lacuc, i kabedo me deyo, nio ka abiketo lukworri piny i te tyeni.’ 	David himself, speaking by the Holy Spirit, declared: “‘The Lord said to my Lord: “Sit at my right hand until I put your enemies under your feet.”’
cwinynye ngette oyot oyot mada	he gets annoyed very quickly
mwodo ka dong odonggo mabocco kace igaddo ci dong pe lot  	when you cut the grass after it has grown tall, it will not grow again
pwacco kom pe ber 	lacerating the body is not good 
cingge acam okwee woko	his left hand is paralysed
gin angoo ma omwoc kuno ni pap?	what bursts there with a bang?
ki bot luloc ma en ocwalogi pi keto can i kom jo ma timo gin maraco, ki pi pwoyo jo ma timo gin ma atir. 	Submit yourselves for the Lord’s sake to every human authority: whether to the emperor, as the supreme authority,
Lupur gumake, ci gupwode, ka guryeme kwede woko, omedo ki dok ki ciŋe nono. 	But they seized him, beat him and sent him away empty-handed.
man en aye lim me abolla i kanica i ceng cabit	this is the money for offering to the church on Sunday
en tye ki twoo me cweer remo 	he is having the disease of haemophilia
lulibbo gin aye joo maracu mada ma ballo kuc ma i lobo 	terrorists are the worst people who spoil peace of the world 
Batija pa Jon twerone oa ki i polo nyo ki bot dano?” 	John’s baptism—was it from heaven, or of human origin?”
punno lawotti pe ber	to con your friend is not good 
Ento ka litic meno oloko kekene ni, ‘Laditta doŋ ogalle ka bino’, ci cako goyo lutic ma co ki ma mon, kun camo, mato, dok mer, 	But suppose the servant says to himself, ‘My master is taking a long time in coming,’ and he then begins to beat the other servants, both men and women, and to eat and drink and get drunk.
Pilato owaco bot ajwagi madito pa Lubaŋa ki lwak ducu ni, “Pe anoŋo kop marac i kom dano man.” 	Then Pilate announced to the chief priests and the crowd, “I find no basis for a charge against this man.”
Ento gin ma gitiyo giporo ki tipo ki cal keken me kabedo maleŋ ma tye i polo	They serve at a sanctuary that is a copy and shadow of what is in heaven
Lamalaika ogamo doge ni, “An Gabriel, acuŋ i nyim Lubaŋa	The angel said to him, “I am Gabriel
Pi meno, ki tuŋ botwu wun jo muye en, Kricito obedo me wel	For in Scripture it says: “See, I lay a stone in Zion, a chosen and precious cornerstone, and the one who trusts in him will never be put to shame.”
yokko tyenne kom ajut 	knocking his foot against the stump, or strikes his foot against the stump
bonyo ka dwong ci nallo jang yat piny 	when the locusts are many, they weigh down the branches of the trees
itye nignig? 	how are you 
Pe iterwa i abita, ento ilarwa bot Larac. [Pien ker ki tek ki deyo obedo meri matwal. Amen]’ 	And forgive us our debts, as we also have forgiven our debtors.
lacoone orro lok mada omiyo laworo dano gunyerro mada pi orro lokke 	the man does entertain people very much in his talks, yesterday he made people laugh very much because of his entertaining talk
wad lum ki jami mukene ma ocullo wang it woko 	remove the grass and other things that have blocked the well
Kadi bed jo mogo pe giye ni an lakwena, ento ki tuŋ botwu an lakwena, pien wun kikomwu aye wubedo lanyut me kwenana i Rwot. 	Even though I may not be an apostle to others, surely I am to you! For you are the seal of my apostleship in the Lord.
pal pal nyo papai en aye yat ma doigo mabor ma nyakko nyige ma donggo bene ka nyigge ocek ci pokke ma woko ma atworo doko ma ocwak ocwak, ka giwanynyo pokke woko ci dong en papai kikomme ma obeddo ocwak ocwak nyo ma kwaar 	pawpaw or papaya, grows quite tall and produces big fruits which have green skin but when ripe it becomes yellow when the skin is removed, the pulp inside is usually yellow but some are also red
Watye ki lok mapol ma myero walok i lok man, ento tek twatwal me niaŋowu, kit macalo wun doŋ wudoko nyap ka winyo lokwa-ni. 	We have much to say about this, but it is hard to make it clear to you because you no longer try to understand.
Waraga man oa ki bot Paulo ki Temceo, ma gin lutic pa Kricito Yecu. Bot jo pa Lubaŋa ducu ma tye i Kricito Yecu ma gibedo i Pilipi, kacel ki lutel ki jo ma konyogi: 	All God’s people here send you greetings, especially those who belong to Caesar’s household.
pien pe wun aye wubilok, ento Cwiny Maleŋ aye bilok. 	Just say whatever is given you at the time, for it is not you speaking, but the Holy Spirit.
Wuyab cwinywu botwa	Therefore, since we have these promises, dear friends, let us purify ourselves from everything that contaminates body and spirit, perfecting holiness out of reverence for God.
Iwong meegiwu obin ka tokko cam ki dano 	call your mother to come to dish out food for the people to eat
dano guwacci ni ginenno jok abinya laworo ki wor ma ryeny malo callo mac	people said that last night they saw black magic, which was lighting or flashing about in the sky
Awobinu odokke iye ni, “Magi ducu doŋ atyeko makogi	“All these I have kept,” the young man said
lak kweri nyany woko ka i purro kwedde i kor got	the edge of the hoe will become blunt if you use it for cultivating a stony field 
cwinynye tinge ni myerro ego Latin ma tye ka ballo pii 	she had an urge that she should beat the child who was spoiling the water
pe maarro mwoc pa luduko pien miyo poo twatwal 	he does not like the burst of the guns because it startles him very much
giora ka lok kwedi, akelli kwena man maber. 	I stand in the presence of God, and I have been sent to speak to you and to tell you this good news.
citto ka nammo i wang oo 	to go to the fireplace where people are sitting, to pass time
Yecu ocako lwoŋogi ni, Wubin wulub kora, ci an abimiyowu wudoko lumak dano. 	“Come, follow me,” Jesus said, “and I will send you out to fish for people.”
coo twerro teerri ipekko, apora bot pe ber 	if you want to do something, you must first understand it very well, because mere imitating it will get you Lao trouble
lakwaara maarro kwanno buk mada 	my grandchild loves very much to read books 
Ci ŋat ma obedo i wi komker owacci, “Nen, aketo jami ducu doko nyen.” Ka dok bene owacci, “Co lok man, pien lok magi lok ma genne dok me ada.” 	He who was seated on the throne said, “I am making everything new!” Then he said, “Write this down, for these words are trustworthy and true.”
latinne tye ki cono ma okwot i congge tung lacam 	the child has septic arthritis in his left knee 
Ento dano ma pe ki Cwiny pa Lubaŋa pe twero gamo gin ma Cwiny pa Lubaŋa miyo, pien ki tuŋ bote obedo gin me miŋo, en pe twero niaŋ iye, pien gin macalo meno Cwiny Maleŋ aye miyo dano ŋeyo pimo. 	The person without the Spirit does not accept the things that come from the Spirit of God but considers them foolishness, and cannot understand them because they are discerned only through the Spirit.
pim maber ka wek icel 	aim well so that you may shoot
dok bene oye dwoko jami ducu bote i Kricito, gin ma tye i wi lobo ki gin ma tye i polo, kun Kricito okelo kuc pi remo me tone i kom yatariya. 	And he is the head of the body, the church; he is the beginning and the firstborn from among the dead, so that in everything he might have the supremacy.
cekko me paipai nen ka komme ducu dong obeddo ocwak ocwak 	the ripening of a paw paw is seen when its body is completely yellow 
mon nyek tin guyette ma guyaarro racca gi ducu ka ma leng 	the co-wives today abused each other very much and revealed all their bad behaviour and manners 
ki wel lupwonnye bene omedde madwoŋ twatwal i Jerucalem, ki lwak ajwagi pa Lubaŋa mapol bene gujolo niye. 	The number of disciples in Jerusalem increased rapidly, and a large number of priests became obedient to the faith.
Meno gin mumiyo en myero odok ma rom aroma ki utmegine i yo ducu, wek omi ebed ajwaka madit ma lakica dok lagen i tic pa Lubaŋa, wek omi ekwany bal pa jone woko. 	For this reason he had to be made like them, fully human in every way, in order that he might become a merciful and faithful high priest in service to God, and that he might make atonement for the sins of the people.
itimmo ngoo? 	what have you done? 
dano mogo marro pyer mon ma tino 	some people like women with narrow waists
Pien tye jo mogo i kingi ma giridde gidonyo i paco pa dano mukene, ci giloyo tam pa mon mogo ma gorogoro, ma peko me bal obwoyogi woko, ma mitgi tye patpat ci bedo ka ywayogi tuŋŋi ki tuŋŋi, 	treacherous, rash, conceited, lovers of pleasure rather than lovers of God—
acommo pii malyet ki pii magic ci dong tye bolo bolo	I added cold water to the hot water and now it is lukewarm
litto man dong orommo komme woko 	he is overwhelmed with body pain or he is severely afflicted with body pain 
En otugi lwoŋogi cut, ci giweko wongi Jebedayo odoŋ ki luticce i yeya, gucako lubo kore. 	Without delay he called them, and they left their father Zebedee in the boat with the hired men and followed him.
Ka kono kom ducu obedo waŋ, kono giwinyo lok ki ŋo? Dok kono kom ducu obedo it, kono giŋweyo ki ŋo? 	If the whole body were an eye, where would the sense of hearing be? If the whole body were an ear, where would the sense of smell be?
Ento komgi oto woko lirut, gulworo kun gitamo ni gineno tipo. 	While they were still talking about this, Jesus himself stood among them and said to them, “Peace be with you.”
danone ka pud tukko kweddi, rwac piny wek ogee cut 	if that man is still tempting you, throw him down so that he may know
yito mukene me lum ka dwog ci kello aona ka dok tunggo dano atungga 	smoke from the grass when it is much, it causes cough and choking of the people
ocammo ngoo 	what has he done? 
Ka ce dako ma cware oto tye ki litinone ki likwaye, myero gin koŋ gukwoŋ pwonyo ticgi me dini i odigi gin kikomgi, kun gimiyo kony bot lunyodogi pi kony mogo ma yam gumiyo botgi, pien meno aye Lubaŋa pwoyo. 	Give proper recognition to those widows who are really in need.
regge dok piny okonynye 	to duck down helped him from getting hurt 
obinno ma wangge col ni cuc 	he came with a deep frown and dark face
Ka doŋ wan litino, ci wan lule jami, wan lule jami pa Lubaŋa kun wanywako lonyone kacel ki Kricito, ka ce waciro can kacel kwede, wek bene walim deyo kacel kwede. 	The Spirit himself testifies with our spirit that we are God’s children.
cinek mac tara woko 	go and switch of the lamp
Lewic omaka omiyo aye ni wan yam pe wabedo tek i yo meno! Ento gin mo keken ma dano okette me nyatte pire, an bene akette woko me nyatte kit meno, ma onoŋo pud aloko macalo lamiŋ. 	In fact, you even put up with anyone who enslaves you or exploits you or takes advantage of you or puts on airs or slaps you in the face.
tuu tye kwene? 	where is your home? 
gwee li tuny 	smells very badly 
Yecu okok ki pig waŋe. 	When Jesus saw her weeping, and the Jews who had come along with her also weeping, he was deeply moved in spirit and troubled.
wil cukari ratili aryo 	buy two pounds of sugar 
leddo nyig two pa ngati mo pe ber 	talking freely to anybody about somebody else disease is not good
guonynyo odoo matek i kom Ocan 	they thoroughly beat Ocan
genno mungati i kic ka dong cammo 	rolls the bread in honey and then eats it
I kare ma Paulo tye ka kurogi i Atene, ka oneno gaŋ meno opoŋ ki cal jogi, ci olyeto cwinye mada. 	While Paul was waiting for them in Athens, he was greatly distressed to see that the city was full of idols.
wuye Lubaŋa, wuye an bene. 	“Do not let your hearts be troubled
ka doŋ olokowa wadoko lwak ma en loyo, kun wadoko ajwagi pa Lubaŋane ma Wonne bene. Deyo ki twero me loc obed bote nakanaka. Amen. 	and has made us to be a kingdom and priests to serve his God and Father—to him be glory and power for ever and ever! Amen.
icitto woko ka nenno gin matye ka kok ci inoggo gin mo 	you went out to see what was making the noise outside, did you find anything?
adag citto ka tweyo yen	I refused to go to gather firewood
jwaa waar meerri maleng 	brush your shoes very clean 
Ka ce owekowu laboŋo pwonyowu macalo litinone mukene ducu, nyuto ni wun doŋ litino luk, pe litinone kikome. 	If you are not disciplined—and everyone undergoes discipline—then you are not legitimate, not true sons and daughters at all.
lwekko wang pe ber ka i donynyo i oddi pa dano 	it is not good to look this way and that way when you enter into people's homes
kun waco ni, “Man aye remo me gicikke ma Lubaŋa ocikowu pire.” 	He said, “This is the blood of the covenant, which God has commanded you to keep.”
Ci gin mo onen botgi macalo leb mac ma opokke ci opye i wi ŋat acel acel i kingi. 	They saw what seemed to be tongues of fire that separated and came to rest on each of them.
Yecu okedo anino ogwil matino, ci oryemogi ducu woko ki i ot pa Lubaŋa, kacel ki romi ki twoni. Oketo lim pa lulok-cente, oryebo mejagi. 	In the temple courts he found people selling cattle, sheep and doves, and others sitting at tables exchanging money.
Pi niye Abraim owinyo dog Lubaŋa i kare ma olwoŋe me cito i lobo mo mukene ma onoŋo yam en mito miye ni obed mere. En oa ki i lobo tugi kun pe ŋeyo ka ma ecito iye. 	By faith Abraham, when called to go to a place he would later receive as his inheritance, obeyed and went, even though he did not know where he was going.
Kit meno gucako cito, gutito lok ni myero dano oŋuti. 	They went out and preached that people should repent.
tunga labolo 	bunch of banana or plantain a hand of bananas
I kare meno kikome en aye jo adek ma gicwalogi bota ki i Cecaria guo kwede i ot ma yam watye iye-ni. 	“Right then three men who had been sent to me from Caesarea stopped at the house where I was staying.
olwoddo lokke i cwinynye ci ononggo ni lokke pe ber	he meditated on the matter in his mind and found out that it was not good
Ki lwak jo ma koni doŋ guye Yecu gubino kun gituco ci giyeko te tyetgi ducu. 	Many of those who believed now came and openly confessed what they had done.
Iworo matek twatwal bene myello kom 	excessve fear also causes trembling of the body 
Ci gukelo dano aryo. Yucepu ma gilwoŋo Barcaba ma nyiŋe mukene Yucito, ki Matiya. 	So they nominated two men: Joseph called Barsabbas (also known as Justus) and Matthias.
litino pe gicirro twoo caddo 	children cannot stand diarrhoea 
miya mo ba 	give me some please 
pud amedde ki waco botwu ni, kadi bed Solomon yam orukke ki deyone ducu, ento pe orukke macalo mo acel i kingi. 	Yet I tell you, not even Solomon in all his splendor was dressed like one of these.
bongo matto lac pa latin woko  	the cloth absorbs the urine of the child
Kadi bed pe atye kacel kwedwu i kom, ento watye kacel i cwiny kun cwinya yom me neno kit ma wuwoto kwede maber i lok ducu, ki niyewu mucuŋ matek i kom Kricito. 	I tell you this so that no one may deceive you by fine-sounding arguments.
gikko tic mere ocakke laworo 	end of his work started yesterday 
ci kerre doŋ bicuŋ niŋniŋ? 	If Satan drives out Satan, he is divided against himself
leba makko dano nonggo bur mo tye piny i tyen nyo i wit can nyo tun 	the swelling of the groin glands comes as a result of some sores in the foot or on the penis or on the labia of vargina
latinne labelu nino ducu pe beddo mot, dok tung kany, dok kwica kun ballo kwede jami 	the child is an imbecile, restless, going this way and that way spoiling things 
ento gwoko cik pa Lubaŋa aye konyo. 	Keeping God’s commands is what counts.
gubeddo ka penynye pi gim ma otimme kany 	they have been inquiring about what has happened here 
pien lwak dano ma otubbe gilubo korgi kun gidaŋŋe ni, “Wuneke woko!” 	The crowd that followed kept shouting, “Get rid of him!”
Ento ka Kricito doŋ obino, ma en aye ajwaka madit me jami mabeco ma bibino, kema ma en tiyo iye kato maca, odoko dit maber makato maca, pien pe gitiyo ki ciŋ, man te lokke ni, pe gin me lobo man. 	But when Christ came as high priest of the good things that are now already here, he went through the greater and more perfect tabernacle that is not made with human hands, that is to say, is not a part of this creation.
cwinynye nwang 	he is courageous and brave
Dworre pi gin maber, ber kare ducu, pe ka an atye botwu keken. 	Have I now become your enemy by telling you the truth?
joggo lok ki bot dano me acoya 	collecting news from the people for publication 
tig ki cinggi ryo ryo 	carry with both hands 
cogi twon dyangi 	very big bulls 
twerre tikka me gerro otti? 	can this house be constructed? 
“Wutamo gin aŋo i kom Kricito ma Lubaŋa oyero? En lakwar aŋa?” Gudokke iye ni, “Lakwar Daudi.” 	While the Pharisees were gathered together, Jesus asked them,
Wa kitambarane nyo boŋŋine me tic yam gikwanyo woko ki bote ka gitero bot lutwo, ci two caŋ woko, ki cen bene a woko ki i kom dano. 	so that even handkerchiefs and aprons that had touched him were taken to the sick, and their illnesses were cured and the evil spirits left them.
jalle kitte pat mada pien ka tye ka lok mo ma ginynyo cwinynye ci tungi currune acurra cut ki bot dano mape parro ni bicwerro twiny gatti mo	the man is a peculier person who when he has an itching word in his mind, speaks it out frankly and does not care whether it will hurt anybody's feelings or not
Giketo deyo i komwa, dok bene giketo lewic i komwa, giyetowa dok bene gipakowa. Giterowa macalo lugoba, ento kun wan jo me ada. 	in truthful speech and in the power of God; with weapons of righteousness in the right hand and in the left;
Yecu ka obedo piny ci olwoŋo jone apar wiye aryo, ocako waccigi ni, “Ka dano mo mito bedo mukwoŋo, myero en aye odoŋ cen i ŋe luwote ducu, en aye obed latic megi ducu.” 	Sitting down, Jesus called the Twelve and said, “Anyone who wants to be first must be the very last, and the servant of all.”
cweer me bao man pe ber  	the planing of this wood is not good
ki kwoŋ ma okwoŋo bot kwarowa Abraim,, 	the oath he swore to our father Abraham:
ticce nino ducu tic atika ki komme 	his work is always really good
ento pi lworo Luparicayo omiyo pe gituco, wek pe giryemgi woko ki i kacokke	Yet at the same time many even among the leaders believed in him
anyira man gimyello umber mada 	these girls dance very well indeed
Pi meno, wunyut mar ma wutye kwede woko ka maleŋ bot dano ducu ma guye Kricito, wek gunen ni nyattewa ma wanyatte kwede piwu onoŋo tye atir.	As for Titus, he is my partner and co-worker among you; as for our brothers, they are representatives of the churches and an honor to Christ.
dano adii ma gipwoddogi tin? 	how many people were beaten today? 
bongo pamba yom dok pe yilloo kom dano 	cotton fabrics are soft and do not irritate the skin
omako woko ni cwic 	he caught it suddenly
Opii pe bedo i ot nakanaka, ento latin anywalli bedo gire nakanaka. 	Jesus replied, “Very truly I tell you, everyone who sins is a slave to sin.
Ento doŋ atito botwu atir ni Elia doŋ otyeko bino wa con, ci gutyeko timo gin ma gimito i kome, macalo yam gicoyo i kome.” 	But I tell you, Elijah has come, and they have done to him everything they wished, just as it is written about him.”
dek orem woko pe orommo dano 	the food was not enough, it was inadengate
opirro kal pong dero 	he filled up the barn with millet up to its brim
gin ma rii doko gweng	what lasts too long hardens into stone
Ci doŋ en obedo kacel kwedgi, obedo ka wirre kwedgi i Jerucalem, 	So Saul stayed with them and moved about freely in Jerusalem, speaking boldly in the name of the Lord.
Kit meno wun wucaden, wupwoyo tic pa kwariwu, pien gin guneko, wun wucano got i wi lyelgi. 	Because of this, God in his wisdom said, ‘I will send them prophets and apostles, some of whom they will kill and others they will persecute.’
Pe wuwek gibwolwu	Nevertheless, the one who receives instruction in the word should share all good things with their instructor.
pida dong tye ka pirro yoo gudo maber mada 	the PWD are now levelling the road very well
kella gin mukene mape glaci me matto nyuka 	bring me something else which is not glass for taking the porridge
oculle i pii 	he dived into the water 
lee laworo ogok mapol mada 	a lot of game came out yesterday
I kare me nino madito onoŋo yam Pilato gonyo iye lamabuc mo woko pi lwak ma gin mito. 	Then Pilate asked him, “Don’t you hear the testimony they are bringing against you?”
ki bot Yecu, layub gicikke manyen, ki bot remo ma gikiro, ma tito ki kica pi gin maber ma kato gin ma remo pa Abel otito pire. 	to Jesus the mediator of a new covenant, and to the sprinkled blood that speaks a better word than the blood of Abel.
wan kenwa 	we ourselves 
lworo ogeŋogi tito lokke ki ŋatti mo. 	They said nothing to anyone, because they were afraid.
Gugamo ni, “Moses yam oye miyo twero ki laco ni myero omi waraga me laryem dakone woko, nyomgi oket woko.” 	They said, “Moses permitted a man to write a certificate of divorce and send her away.”
Pe tyen lokke ni amito mot, ento amito nyayo magoba ma gibikwano botwu. 	for even when I was in Thessalonica, you sent me aid more than once when I was in need.
Pien aŋeyo ada ni, kadi to, kadi kwo, kadi lumalaika, kadi luloc, kadi gin ma tye i kare man, kadi gin ma mito bino, kadi teko, 	No, in all these things we are more than conquerors through him who loved us.
gwee dekke ka pud peya okwok 	smell the food if it has not yet gone bad
Kono en dano ma niye mere goro-ni obedo omeru ma yam Kricito oto pire, en bito pi ŋecci! 	So this weak brother or sister, for whom Christ died, is destroyed by your knowledge.
laggo dano ki gin mo oyot oyot, ma gin pe kwedde, ber mada 	helping people quickly, with the things that they do not have, is very good 
guur yugi kacel 	collect the rubbish together 
gung piny ka wek gibyel Latin i geyi 	bend down so that the child may be tied to your back
Utmega, pe atamo ni doŋ atyeko makone	Not that I have already obtained all this, or have already arrived at my goal, but I press on to take hold of that for which Christ Jesus took hold of me.
cwallo motoka wek omoor 	pushing the car so that it starts 
I kare meno Petero ocuŋ i kin lwak utmego ma giromo miya acel ki pyeraryo kun wacci, 	In those days Peter stood up among the believers (a group numbering about a hundred and twenty)
aram tala ninno ducu gituk gikatto kany 	the white and black storks always pass through here 
Wor woru ki meni, ki dok ni, Mar lawoti macalo imarre keni.” 	honor your father and mother,’ and ‘love your neighbor as yourself.’”
mkiila en aye gin ma gimiyo ki gatti mo ka otimmo gin mo maber twatwal macallo i tukko, donge, goyo teneci, cayanci ki mukene ducu ma pat pat, me pwoone 	medals are the things that are given to anybody who has excelled in anything such as sports, boxing, tennis, science, and many others, to thank him 
pal latinne pien tye ka dangge twatwal	slap the child because she is shouting too much
En gin mumiyo Lujudaya dok gumedde ka yenyo yo me neke, pe pi turo cabit keken, ento bene pi lwoŋo Lubaŋa ni wonne, ma kun kette kene ni erom ki Lubaŋa. 	In his defense Jesus said to them, “My Father is always at his work to this very day, and I too am working.”
yoo tye kwene? 	where is, the road
jammi ni ducu twerro nekke 	to extinguish the fire 
Pien kare bibino i komi ma lukworri gibitoro lobo rumi dyere, gibidiri tuŋŋi ki tuŋŋi, 	The days will come upon you when your enemies will build an embankment against you and encircle you and hem you in on every side.
gibiŋolle kop me to, ci gibimiye i ciŋ Lurok	They will condemn him to death and will hand him over to the Gentiles,
nyimme wangi lam mada pe ocek maber 	this time the simsim is very poorly developed
latinne dok itte obeddo pakapaka callo it olik 	the child has very large ears like those of bats, bat ears
Ka pyem doŋ obedo dwoŋ, ci Petero oa malo owaco botgi ni, “Utmego, wun wuŋeyo ni yam con Lubaŋa oyero an ki i kinwu ni Lurok gibiwinyo lok me kwena maber ki i doga ka guye. 	After much discussion, Peter got up and addressed them: “Brothers, you know that some time ago God made a choice among you that the Gentiles might hear from my lips the message of the gospel and believe.
giwirro moo i pal cwinynye me mime gum 	they smear his epigastrium to bless him 
Ci polo bene orwenyo woko liweŋ calo karatac ma gidolo, kadi ki got ki cula nam gikobogi woko ducu ki ka-kargi. 	The heavens receded like a scroll being rolled up, and every mountain and island was removed from its place.
Yecu otoo pi bal mewa 	Jesus died for our transgression
pien ŋat matidi twatwal i kinwu ducu en aye ŋat madit.” 	For it is the one who is least among you all who is the greatest.”
wig wiye woko 	turn his head aside that is turn his mind away from what he was doing or turn him to do something bad
“Doŋ wuwinyo yam ka giwaco ni, ‘Waŋ giculo ki waŋ, lak giculo ki lak.’ 	“You have heard that it was said, ‘Eye for eye, and tooth for tooth.’
lapwony tye kwene ma litino gitye ka dange twatwal i kilaci? 	where is the teacher now that the children are shouting very much in the class?
man dong adillo camme adilla pien cwinynya pe mitto cam	I am just reluctantly pushing in the food because I do not feel like eating food
dakone komme mit mada, wille awilla ka tic 	his wife is very active, she works with speed and agility 
Man aye lok mumiyo yam acoyo waraga maca, me temowu, wek anen ka wuwinya i yo ducu. 	I urge you, therefore, to reaffirm your love for him.
ocitto i agweer kal	she went to harvest the left over millet after the owner has harvested
lee ka ringo en aye twerro cubbe maber 	it is easy to spear a running animal 
tye dano mo ma kutto lure mamit kany mada 	there is a person here, who plays recorder very nicely
aŋa mono ma dok ogeŋowu i lubo lok me ada? 	You were running a good race
i dwe me apar en aye gikayo iye kal 	the millet is harvested in the tenth month of the year 
Cen gua ki i kom dano-nu, gudonyo i opego, lwak opego gutwarre ki ŋwec nia ki i kor got malo, ci gumwony woko i nam. 	When the demons came out of the man, they went into the pigs, and the herd rushed down the steep bank into the lake and was drowned.
Wun doŋ wubedo ki jami lonyo ma malo twatwal ki yomcwiny i lobo	You have lived on earth in luxury and self-indulgence
ywii ngwec matek 	run very fast 
gwak latin ene 	here hold the child
Wun giwu wutuco kenwu ni wun likwayo pa jo ma yam guneko lunebi-ni. 	And you say, ‘If we had lived in the days of our ancestors, we would not have taken part with them in shedding the blood of the prophets.’
aparro mada me cammo kic 	I yearn very much to eat honey
guniya kado ne pek mada 	the bag of salt is very heavy
Atoo ogerro kwene? 	where is Atoo married? 
ma tidi mo kono inogge kany 	for a fraction of a minute you would have found him here
Ci gubedo kunnu ki lupwonnye pi kare malac.	And they stayed there a long time with the disciples.
aweno pe kilaro ki won tol	no one disputes the ownership of a guinea fowl with the owner
lokke dong makko dongwa woko 	his words has surprised us, (and we are unable to speak)
teer wunu nyim ki kal magi wek wucikan wunu i bicu 	take the simsim and millet and hide them in the cave
lacoo uui laduur twatwal pe miyo gin nm ki gatti 	a stingy person does not Hive anything to anybody 
yaarro kweyo, kal, ki nyim	spreading out sand, millet and simsim
pit tek mada	feedingis very difficult 
lupwuu tin omwonno piny woko 	the fog or mist has densely covered the country
gem balo wat 	stinginess spoils relationship between the relatives
pukko cukari madowong mada i cai mere ka dong matto 	pours a lot of sugar in his tea and then takes it 
agaa i kinwu ma oebeddo lapyem me rette in ki Jon? 	who among you is going to he a challenger today to Jon in a game I wrestling? 
Bot Temceo latinna me ada i niye: Lubaŋa Won ki Kricito Yecu Rwotwa omii gum, kica, ki kuc. 	Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus by the command of God our Savior and of Christ Jesus our hope,
Doŋ ka Rwot aye ma ŋolo kop i komwa, en pwodowa me pwonyowa, wek pe giŋol kop olowa kacel ki jo me lobo. 	Nevertheless, when we are judged in this way by the Lord, we are being disciplined so that we will not be finally condemned with the world.
ceddo me pul tin omakkongi mada 	if you do not come
terru kaal wii pero ka twoo iye	take the millet to the platform for drying
Pien doŋ alor piny ki i polo, pe ka tiyo gin ma iya mito pira kena, ento ka tiyo gin ma ŋat ma yam oora mito. 	But as I told you, you have seen me and still you do not believe.
lokke niangge maber	his talk is understandable
Gwok nyo ibipenya ni, “Piŋo mono en pud waco ni wan lubalo? Aŋa ma twero geŋo gin ma en mito?” 	Therefore God has mercy on whom he wants to have mercy, and he hardens whom he wants to harden.
gwogi tin gumwodde ki cogo mada 	today dogs ate a lot of bones
“Bot lamalaika pa lwak muye an ma gitye i Cardic co kit man ni, “ ‘Man lok pa ŋat ma tye ki cwiny pa Lubaŋa abiro, ki lakalatwe abiro. “ ‘Aŋeyo ticci ducu	“To the angel of the church in Sardis write: These are the words of him who holds the seven spirits of God and the seven stars
twoo ogarro korre woko 	the chest pain seems to have pierced through his chest and it is fixed, so that he cannot breathe
Lukwat guriŋo gutito lokke i gaŋ madit, ki i kin paco. Dano mapol gumol gubino ka neno gin ma otimme. 	Those tending the pigs ran off and reported this in the town and countryside, and the people went out to see what had happened.
adukune obeddo akong akong	the basket has flat sides 
twom cukari iteer me amatta ki cai 	take some sugar for taking in tea
Gin gupenye ni, “En otimmi niŋniŋ? Oyabo waŋi niŋniŋ?” 	That was why his parents said, “He is of age; ask him.”
latin tye ka jotto kome ki toyo 	the child is wet with dew all over his body 
twoo ogwenno komme woko 	the illness has made her very thin and weak
meni tye kwene? 	where is your mother? 
Nen,, abibolo dako-nu i wi kitanda ma noŋo two marac, pacogge bene abibologi woko i can madit atika, ka pe guŋut, gukwero lubo tim tarwaŋ pa dako-nu. 	So I will cast her on a bed of suffering, and I will make those who commit adultery with her suffer intensely, unless they repent of her ways.
Pi meno Lubaŋa biketogi i te twero me bwola, wek guye goba, 	For this reason God sends them a powerful delusion so that they will believe the lie
ocako neno malo i polo, ocur, kun waco ni, “Eppata”, te lokke ni, “Yabbe.” 	He looked up to heaven and with a deep sigh said to him, “Ephphatha!” (which means “Be opened!”).
Pien ka ituco ki dogi ni, “Kricito aye Rwot,” ma kun iye bene ki i cwinyi ni Lubaŋa yam ocere woko ki i kin jo muto, ci ibilarre. 	But what does it say? “The word is near you; it is in your mouth and in your heart,” that is, the message concerning faith that we proclaim:
twoorre ki meja i dye wor	to knock against the table at night 
jabu, ryal, litino kidi me wel, tiko matar me wel, boŋo camanini maberre, boŋŋi ma obedo lamar lamar, boŋŋi aridi ki makwar, ki kit bao mapatpat ducu ma ŋwecgi kur, jami ducu ma gitiyo ki lak lyec-gu, jami ducu ma gitiyogi ki bao ma welgi malo twatwal, mola, nyonyo, ki got me gedo ma giliyo aliya maber twatwal, 	cargoes of gold, silver, precious stones and pearls; fine linen, purple, silk and scarlet cloth; every sort of citron wood, and articles of every kind made of ivory, costly wood, bronze, iron and marble;
Wun bene kit meno, myero wutam i komwu kekenwu ni, wun jo muto tuŋ bot bal, ento wubedo kwo tuŋ bot Lubaŋa. 	The death he died, he died to sin once for all; but the life he lives, he lives to God.
la gwok kinguku ma cete pud lyet	catch and punish a pppy while its excreta is still steaming
lobo mewa pud pot ye maber, ayella yella pud dwog iye mada 	our country is not yet well, there is still much trouble in it 
“Pe gineno gin ma miyo gilworo Lubaŋa.” 	and the way of peace they do not know.”
Yam owinyo lok mogo ma pe myero lokke ka maleŋ, ma pe giye ni dano mo otuci. 	And I know that this man—whether in the body or apart from the body I do not know, but God knows—
“Ker me polo rom ki dano ma en won ot ma opuk woko odiko con ocito ka wako lutic i poto olokke. 	“For the kingdom of heaven is like a landowner who went out early in the morning to hire workers for his vineyard.
wek awilli cati acel 	let me buy for you one shirt
gin angoo ma nyutto yec pa gabumente 	what is there that shows consent of the government? 
cwinynye omme ni myero elwii woko ki buc 	his mind urges him to escape from the prison
i kare ma ginogge ka butto ki dako pa lawotte, opye woko, ci oringgo lunywan 	at the time when he was found sleeping with his friend's wife, he jumped out and ran naked 
Ka ociko ladit mony ma loyo dano miya ni myero ogwok Paulo i buc ento obed laboŋo ayela mo, pe gigeŋ lureme ka gimito mine kony. 	He ordered the centurion to keep Paul under guard but to give him some freedom and permit his friends to take care of his needs.
Onen tye ka juyo litinone ni pe myerro gumat kongo macallo litino pa joo mukene  	Onen is telling off his children not to drink beer like other people's children
litino gimaarro lyerre mada 	the children love swinging very much
lapwonynye myerro oket cwinynye me winyno lok pa lapwony maber 	a student must pay attention to his teacher's words
rii komme obeddo tabu tabu 	the giraffe's body is regularly spotted
“Ka doŋ mwaka me ditte oromo pyeraŋwen, ci tam obino i cwinye me limo utmege, likwayo pa Icrael. 	“When Moses was forty years old, he decided to visit his own people, the Israelites.
ywee obworo pyen matye i gut ot caa 	sweep the cobwebs which are in the corner of the house 
Co aryo bibedo i poto, gibikwanyo ŋat acel, gibiweko ŋat acel doŋ.” 	Two men will be in the field; one will be taken and the other left.
jalle nia ikare ma opotto ki motoka ci oturro iye tyenne dong tukko wotto ni gidi gidi 	since the fellow was involved in motor accident in which he broke his leg, he has been hobbling like that 
latinne maarro lyerre kene mada i align 	the child loves very much swinging on the rope by himself alone
munynyo teblet pe tek 	it is not difficult to swallow the tablets 
Pien Lubaŋa tye acel, Ŋat ma ribo Lubaŋa ki dano bene tye acel, ma obedo dano, en aye Kricito Yecu, 	who wants all people to be saved and to come to a knowledge of the truth.
Alegijanda latet mola otima marac twatwal	When you come, bring the cloak that I left with Carpus at Troas, and my scrolls, especially the parchments.
Cakke i kare ma wao i Makedonia pe wabedo ki yweyo mo. Can onoŋo orumowa woko tuŋŋi ki tuŋŋi, lweny i kin dano ki lworo ma onoŋo tye i cwinywa. 	I am greatly encouraged; in all our troubles my joy knows no bounds.
jamine gidwoggo tin 	his things were returned today
oecitto ka rukke  	he is going to dress up
dyelli batte tye kwene 	where is the foreleg of this goat? 
amam maarro cammo lapena twatwal omiyo i leb muno gilwonggoni 'lapena amam' 	pigeon loves very much eating the peas that is why they call it 'pigeon peas'
Abinyuto taŋo malo i polo ki lanyut mapatpat piny i wi lobo, remo ki mac ki yito ma duny. 	I will show wonders in the heavens above and signs on the earth below, blood and fire and billows of smoke.
gucokke laworo i bar odilo  	they assembled in the football field yesterday
manok kono ocello wang lawotte ki lacuur 	he very nearly hit the eyes of his friend with a stone from the sling 
Pien bedo me lewic me loko i kom gin ma gitiyo i muŋ aloka keken. 	Have nothing to do with the fruitless deeds of darkness, but rather expose them.
oluma jubi 	head bull of a buffalo herd
Ka ce dano mo otamo ni en ladini kun pe juko lebe, noŋo bwolle abwola kene ki i cwinye, dinine-nu konnye pe. 	Those who consider themselves religious and yet do not keep a tight rein on their tongues deceive themselves, and their religion is worthless.
om cukari me tai 	get the sugar for tea 
awinynyoni maara komme lit 	I heard that my mother-in-law is ill 
Waŋeyo ni wan litino pa Lubaŋa, dok waŋeyo ni lobo ducu tye i te loc pa Larac. 	We know that we are children of God, and that the whole world is under the control of the evil one.
macalo yam imiye twero i kom gin ducu ma tye ki kom, wek omi kwo ma pe tum bot jo ducu ma ceŋ imiyo bote. 	Glorify your Son, that your Son may glorify you.
Mot me kica pa Lubaŋa, ki lwoŋone, pe twero lokke. 	As far as the gospel is concerned, they are enemies for your sake; but as far as election is concerned, they are loved on account of the patriarchs,
Olobo onenno can mada i India 	Olobo suffered very much in India 
ka imitto nyako ci wil agit ma irukko i cinge 	if you love a girl, buy a ring and put it on her finger 
Jo meno myero gubed jo ma lok mo marac pe i komgi, ma ŋat acel acel bedo ki dako acel keken. Litinogi bene myero gubed jo muye Rwot, ma lok me caro caro mo pe owinnye i komgi, nyo kadi ki lok mo me pyem. 	The reason I left you in Crete was that you might put in order what was left unfinished and appoint elders in every town, as I directed you.
Koŋ wupar mono pi agak	Consider the ravens: They do not sow or reap, they have no storeroom or barn; yet God feeds them
anyira dong gitye ka lyakko tyen gi ki moo me citto ka myel 	the girls are smearing their legs with oil for going to dance
Ento dano ma gilaro dito, ma pe gilubo lok ada, ento gilubo gigi kit marac, Lubaŋa biculogi kun timogi ki akemo dok ki kiniga mager atika. 	To those who by persistence in doing good seek glory, honor and immortality, he will give eternal life.
Pien ka doŋ waribbe kacel kwede i to mo ma cal ki tone-ni, kit meno bene wabiribbe kwede i cer ma cal ki cer ma gicero en kwede-ni. 	We were therefore buried with him through baptism into death in order that, just as Christ was raised from the dead through the glory of the Father, we too may live a new life.
laput en aye tara ma dano gitimmo me menynyo oddigi 	laput is the 'lamp' that people make for lighting their houses
wamitto coo mabocco keken gin aye gudony me beddo acekere 	we want only tall men who should join to be policemen 
ma yam en oonyo i komwa madwoŋ i Lalarwa Yecu Kricito, 	But when the kindness and love of God our Savior appeared,
Lok man ducu otimme wek lok pa Rwot ocobbe kakare kit macalo yam oloko i dog lunebi ni. 	All this took place to fulfill what the Lord had said through the prophet:
lapoya tye ka yerro cam ki i debbe yogi 	the mad man is picking food from the rubbish bin
cwici, makatto me kal ikare mukene giwanggo me kado atwonna 	the chaff especially that of millet sometimes is burnt for alkaline salt
par pa latinne ma orweny woko ni tye ka nekke woko 	the sorrow for the loss of his child is killing him 
en bene dano ma genne, dok en oa ki botwu. Gin bitito botwu gin ducu ma doŋ otimme kany. 	He is coming with Onesimus, our faithful and dear brother, who is one of you
Man omiyo abako doga botwu, myero wunyut bote mar ma wutye kwede i kome. 	Now instead, you ought to forgive and comfort him, so that he will not be overwhelmed by excessive sorrow.
cittu i lyek ka cokko yen 	go into the field where the grass has been burned to collect the firewood
atammo ni nyo bicitto 	I think that perhaps she would go or I thought that perhaps she will go 
redde i wii litino bangogi woko gidoko ming 	shouting at the children, makes them lose confidence in themselves and so become foolish
joo ma guporre aye gibicitto i wii polo 	only the holy ones who will go to heaven
pii rye ka wallo i agulo i wii keno 	the water is boiling in a pot on the hearth 
agwara mape me anywalli ma yang oaa wa con pe teerri kamo 	improvised things which are not traditional leads you nowhere
min Latin tye ka dotto latinne 	the mother is suckling her child 
lakit lacoone an dong acirre mada	I have endured very much that type of person
paco dong oballe woko	the home is now spoiled,in other words, there is no peace except trouble at home now
Utmego gucwalo Paulo ki Cira gucito woko i dyewor meno wa i Berea cut	As soon as it was night, the believers sent Paul and Silas away to Berea
I kare ma Yecu odonyo i Kapernaum, ladit mo ma loyo asakari obino bote, ma lege kun wacci, 	But go, show yourself to the priest and offer the gift Moses commanded, as a testimony to them.”
Ento ka Luparicayo guneno, ci guwaco bot Yecu ni, “Nen, lupwonnyeni gitiyo gin ma cik ogeŋo ni pe giti i ceŋ cabit.” 	When they had crossed over, they landed at Gennesaret.
latin marac pe winynyo lapwony 	a bad child does not obey the teacher 
lok ma en olokkoni dano pud tye ki gug ic iiye 	people are still suspicious of what he said
ojwayo coc ma onongo tye i kom bao me coyo coc 	he wiped off the writing which was on the blackboard
Wek gubedi	He replied, “Every plant that my heavenly Father has not planted will be pulled up by the roots.
acurre i pii ka kwang	I jumped into the water to swim
makaa en aye gin ma dong gitiyo kwedde me teddo, me murro pii cello dek ki mukene 	charcoal is used as fuel for cooking, boiling, flying, and so on
nyog piny ka wek i kwany 	squat down in order to pick it
dako iye dong ocek woro-woro, pe dong katto tin mape onywal 	the lady's abdomen is greatly distended and full, this night will not pass before she delivers
winyo pyee i wii yat  	birds alight and perch on the trees
lyerro dano pi bal ma gutimmo marac 	hanging people for serious crime that they committed
jeg dyel pi banya 	deposit a goat for payment of the debt 
Doŋ tam pa Kricito ki pa Belial twero rwatte? Gin aŋo ma dano ma oye Yecu twero nywako gin ki ŋat ma pe oye? 	We are not withholding our affection from you, but you are withholding yours from us.
kicaa cig ma dakoni omakko twerro yutte woko ki i cingge 	the handbag which the woman is holding can be snatched away from her hand
lokke pe mit miya dong gamma keken 	his talk is boring and makes me keep on yawning
pimmo lee ki luduku	to aim at the animal with the gun
Dano ma tuco ni Yecu en Wod pa Lubaŋa, Lubaŋa bedo i iye, ki en bene bedo i i Lubaŋa. 	If anyone acknowledges that Jesus is the Son of God, God lives in them and they in God.
dul me kom matye ikom coo ki lee ma coo, ma gilayo kwedde dok ma gibutto kwedde ki mon 	it is part of the body that is found in man and male animals, which is for urination and for sex 
bongone obeddo ocwak ocwak 	the cloth is yellow
teggo apwa woko ki i bongo 	shaking the dust away from the clothes
Myero obed dano ma gwoko welo, ma maro gin maber, dano ma lone kene, ma cwinye atir, dano maleŋ, dok ŋat ma gwokke kene. 	Since an overseer manages God’s household, he must be blameless—not overbearing, not quick-tempered, not given to drunkenness, not violent, not pursuing dishonest gain.
notto lem dakone 	to kiss his wife's cheek 
anyira nino ducu pe gimitto nenno wang dano atir ento gimaaro gayo dano agaya 	the girls always do not like to look at people straight in their eyes but look at them from the corner of their eyes 
tye ka gwillo wange ki i but dirica wek enen gin ma litino gitye ka timmone i ot 	he is peeping through a gap in the window to see what the children are doing in the house 
In imito neka kit ma laworo ineko Laejipt-ti?’ 	Are you thinking of killing me as you killed the Egyptian yesterday?’
latinne rii twatwal ka Iwok pien pe ngeyo Iwok 	the child always takes a long time to bathe because he does not know how to bathe 
Dako pe loyo kome kene, ento kono cware aye ma loyo	The wife does not have authority over her own body but yields it to her husband
Ka obino, ci noŋo giyweyo i ot woko maleŋ, giyubo maber. 	When it arrives, it finds the house swept clean and put in order.
Wan watuco pi Kricito kun waciko jo ducu, dok bene wapwonyo jo ducu ki ryeko ducu, wek wakel dano acel acel i nyim Luba?a ma do? oteggi i Kricito. 	To them God has chosen to make known among the Gentiles the glorious riches of this mystery, which is Christ in you, the hope of glory.
ringone twerro mwodde 	the meat can be eaten 
Ento wamito waniaŋ tammi ki boti, pien waŋeyo ni i kabedo ducu giloko lok marac i kom dul man ma icwako-ni.” 	But we want to hear what your views are, for we know that people everywhere are talking against this sect.”
latin man dok poo twatwal, myerro kome obed lit 	this child startles too much, he must be ill 
lak mataar aye gwee 	the white teeth are the ones that smell, meaning that do not look at the beauty only but the character, and manner of the person
yatte pe twero itte 	the tree cannot be climbed or it is impossible to climb the tree 
cwinynye omme ni myerro elweny 	he feels like fighting or urged to fight
umme tye ka cweer remo 	she is bleeding from the nose
parro mada pi rwenyno latinne	mourns very much the loss of his child
En bibino, ci neko lupur meno woko ducu, miyo poto olok bot jo mukene.” Ka guwinyo lok man, guwaco ni, “Pe kumeno!” 	He will come and kill those tenants and give the vineyard to others.” When the people heard this, they said, “God forbid!”
ci owacci, “Wua woko	When Jesus entered the synagogue leader’s house and saw the noisy crowd and people playing pipes,
latek dano ma nonggo gitye ka lweny 	a person who separates two fighting people
Ka guketo ciŋgi i komgi, ci gulimo Cwiny Maleŋ. 	Then Peter and John placed their hands on them, and they received the Holy Spirit.
dakone oyabbo wang ge tin 	the woman his wife has given birth today 
pokko cam ki dano 	distributing food to the people
acari gipurro manok pien me amwodda keken	a very small quantity of the sweet sorghum is produced because it is for eating raw only
otangge ocitto ka mukene 	he suddenly turned and went somewhere else
ogato okok tung kany laworo 	the lion roared this side yesterday
mac ma nakanen gicwinynyo i lum pud lye ka wanggo lum, citto kwedde anyim ni nyanya nyanya 	the grass that was set on fire sometimes ago is still burning and going on forward steadily
Dok ot ka iye opokke aryo, ot meno pe twero cuŋ. 	If a house is divided against itself, that house cannot stand.
Ento Lubaŋa yam odokke iye gin aŋo? Odok iye ni, “Pud aweko jo alip abiro gudoŋ bota, ma peya gurumo coŋgi i nyim Baal.” 	“Lord, they have killed your prophets and torn down your altars; I am the only one left, and they are trying to kill me”?
“Ada awaco botwu ni, gin mo ducu ma wutweyo i wi lobo man gibitweyo kadi wa i polo, gin mo ducu ma wubigonyo i wi lobo man gibigonyo bene wa i polo. 	“Truly I tell you, whatever you bind on earth will be bound in heaven, and whatever you loose on earth will be loosed in heaven.
lakwal maarro cammo labolo ki bwino mada 	the babbler likes very much to eat bananas and mulberry fruits
joo mogo gitinggo adul yat en aye me beddo meggi	some people carry pieces of wood and use them for sitting on
ci doŋ miyo wubedo maromrom	At the present time your plenty will supply what they need, so that in turn their plenty will supply what you need
gitye ka lebbo lawotgi ma oturro tyenne i tukko odilo 	they are carrying their colleague who has broken his leg in the football
rwot loya ki ngo	with what is the chief better than me?
nyako ma adunoni en aye oloyo i ngwec	the middle sized roundish girl is the one who won in the race
ogul nido bad dano woko 	the armlet does narrow the arm, or the arm where the armlet is worn becomes small
gitye ka tet i gang 	they are forging at home
Yecu ki lupwonnyene bene gilwoŋogi i nyom. 	But since you do not believe what he wrote, how are you going to believe what I say?”
taara man taarre nen wa loka kulu tung kwica 	when this lamp is lit, its brightness is seen over the other side of the river
piki piki man dong mitto acatta pien dong otii woko 	this motorcycle now needs to be sold because it is too old 
“Dano acel acel ma winyo lokka ce tiyo, bibedo calo dano maryek, ma ogero ode i kom pata got. 	Away from me, you evildoers!’
ngadi dok larere twatwal kadi gin ma en pe iye ride iye 	so and so is a meddler even in a thing which does not concern him, he interferes
odaŋŋe ki dwan maloŋo ni, “Itye ki gum i kin mon, latin ma i ii bene tye ki gum! 	In a loud voice she exclaimed: “Blessed are you among women, and blessed is the child you will bear!
Ento koni acikowu ni wudi cwinywu pien kwo pa ŋat mo i kinwu pe birwenyo, ento mel aye. 	But now I urge you to keep up your courage, because not one of you will be lost; only the ship will be destroyed.
muni maarro cammo aboke muranga mada ma giteddo atedda	the Europeans like very much eating cooked fresh green beans
regge dok piny okonynye 	bending down helped him from getting hurt 
en aye lok mewa me teekwaro ma gibokko mwaka ki mwaka ki litino, makatto i kare me gwenynyo nyim, gibittongi kwedde wek gubin ka gwenynyone 	it is a traditional tale which is told to the children year after year, especially during the time of breaking open the fresh pods of simsim, to entice them to come to help in the breaking of the pods of the simsim
nyebbe ki lapwony	becoming familiar with the teacher 
yoo dong gityekko yubbo maber mada 	the road has been well repaired
Pi meno pe wubwot tekcwiny woko, pien tye ki bakacic madit ma wubilimo. 	So do not throw away your confidence; it will be richly rewarded.
ni ebimiyowa watiyo bote laboŋo lworo, kun olarowa ki i ciŋ lukworwa, 	to rescue us from the hand of our enemies, and to enable us to serve him without fear
i kare me yacco dako myerro otem cammo cam ducu madowong ma cwinynye mitto 	during pregnancy a woman must eat a lot ot the food that she likes
Ento ka ŋat mo maro Lubaŋa, ci Lubaŋa bene ŋeye. 	But whoever loves God is known by God.
kwidi cwaa en aye ngat acel ikom gin ma kello ayilla i dong ngwiny litino ma miyo gin gwennyo gwinygi pi kare ducu 	thread worms are one of the things that cause irritations around the anus of children and make them scratch their bottoms most of the time, as they scratch their bottoms, they pick the eggs of the worm under their nails and get reinfection again and so on until treated
Gin mumiyo acoyo lok ma pud atye ka mabor kwedwu, wek pe abed ger i komwu ka abino, kun atiyo ki twero ma yam Rwot omiya wek akonywu me doŋo, ento pe me dwokowu cen. 	We are glad whenever we are weak but you are strong; and our prayer is that you may be fully restored.
werro ot ki rangi	plastering the house with colour
wek nyerro woko  	don't laugh at the crippled
oddo wic ki teer luduko 	heating the head with the butt of a gun
bitto dano ki lim wek gubol kwir pirri 	to allure the people with money so that they vote for you 
kot ma laworo ocweer ki pee ni ogoyo pot anyogi oballo marac mada 	the rain that fell yesterday with the hailstones, destroyed the maize leaves completely 
Yam acoyo botwu i waragana ni meno, pe wuribbe ki jo ma gitimo tim kwele. 	I wrote to you in my letter not to associate with sexually immoral people—
wot irab ki nget kanica ci ioo i gang kwan pa anyira 	go round the church and you will reach the girl's school
gitwerro miyo dano beddo layom bene ka giliro del cunne woko 	a man can have his gland exposed also if his penis is circumcised
I kare ma doŋ gitye ka lor piny ki i wi got, Yecu ocikogi ni pe gutit lokke bot dano mo i kom gin ma guneno, nio waŋ ma Wod pa dano ocer ki i kin jo muto. 	As they were coming down the mountain, Jesus gave them orders not to tell anyone what they had seen until the Son of Man had risen from the dead.
ngii ki luwotti ma wutye kwedgi i dong tic 	be friendly with the colleagues with whom you are working
min gweno bene tonggo kiteya i kin litino 	the hen also eats the food which the chicks are eating
Gam mo ma yam pe ginoŋo nyiŋe gicoyo i buk me kwo, gibolo woko i nam me mac.	Anyone whose name was not found written in the book of life was thrown into the lake of fire.
ma onoŋo tye ki deyo pa Lubaŋa. Onoŋo ryeny calo kidi me wel madit makato ducu, ma pe nen atata, calo jacipa, dok leŋ calo gweŋ ma mil amila. 	It shone with the glory of God, and its brilliance was like that of a very precious jewel, like a jasper, clear as crystal.
openo marro cammo labolo ma ocek ki nyig yadi ducu mukene mapol 	the turaco likes eating ripe bananas and many other fruits
en pe ngeyo jwaano jami 	he does not know how to polish things 
Lukwat gudok kun gimiyo deyo bot Lubaŋa, gipake pi gin ducu ma guwinyo, dok guneno, macalo yam gitito botgi. 	The shepherds returned, glorifying and praising God for all the things they had heard and seen, which were just as they had been told.
Jo ducu ma gibedo i lobo gibiworo lee-nu, dano acel acel ma onoŋo nyiŋe pe gicoyo i buk me kwo pa Latin romo ma yam gineko ca, cakke wa i acakki piny. 	All inhabitants of the earth will worship the beast—all whose names have not been written in the Lamb’s book of life, the Lamb who was slain from the creation of the world.
jony me tyen aa pi beddo nakanaka i kom tyen 	numbness of the leg comes as a result of sitting for a long time on the leg
liyo pii me loggo 	pouring water for washing the hands
i kare ducu mitto lweny alwenynya ki nyekke 	all the time she wants to fight with her co-wife 
kwok tye ka nyirro i nyimme 	beads of sweat are coming out over his face 
gin angoo ma nyutto yec pa gabumente	what is there that shows acceptance of the government? 
ka ce onoŋo yam otimo bal mo, ci gibitime iye kica. 	If they have sinned, they will be forgiven.
“Lapwony, cik mene madit makato cik ducu?” 	One of them, an expert in the law, tested him with this question:
Ento ka ce watye ki gen me noŋo gin ma pe waneno kome, ci wakuro gin meno kun wadiyo cwinywa. 	Not only so, but we ourselves, who have the firstfruits of the Spirit, groan inwardly as we wait eagerly for our adoption to sonship, the redemption of our bodies.
kel kikwaci wek gikol ki okuto i tyen latin 	bring the safety pin so that a thorn may be removed from the child's foot
pur pe gin ma yot, ka pe kiiyo cwinynyi matek, pe itwerro purro poto madit 	cultivation is not an easy thing, if you are not determined, you cannot cultivate a big field
I dog gaŋŋe lacan mo onoŋo buto iye, nyiŋe Lajaro, ma kome orwato bur, 	“There was a rich man who was dressed in purple and fine linen and lived in luxury every day.
aduku adwogo en aye gicitto kwedde me kayo kal	the big basket is used for going to gather the millet
Ento Yecu owaco botgi ni, “Wun aye jo ma nyuto kit ma atirwu bot dano, ento Lubaŋa ŋeyo cwinywu	The Pharisees, who loved money, heard all this and were sneering at Jesus.
Won pe ŋolo kop i kom dano mo, ento doŋ otyeko miyo twer me ŋolo kop ducu bot Wod, 	For just as the Father raises the dead and gives them life, even so the Son gives life to whom he is pleased to give it.
tyenne ma kanca tye iyeni twerro golle 	the leg which has cancer can be amputated
Ento an pe amito awakke pi gin mo, kono pi yatariya pa Rwotwa Yecu Kricito keken, pien ki tuŋ bot lobo ducu doŋ giguro woko i kom yatariya, ki an kikoma bene doŋ gigura woko ki tuŋ bot lobo. 	Not even those who are circumcised keep the law, yet they want you to be circumcised that they may boast about your circumcision in the flesh.
pee dyel iter kama ginekko lye dyegi 	pull along the goat to the slaughter house
pot i pii wek ikwang	fall into water so as to swim
ka ŋolo kop i kom jo ducu, ki ka miyo kop wek olo jo ducu ma pe gilworo Lubaŋa pi timgi ma pe gilworo kwede Lubaŋa, ki pi lok ducu me gero ma lubalo ma pe gilworo Lubaŋa guloko i kome.” 	Enoch, the seventh from Adam, prophesied about them: “See, the Lord is coming with thousands upon thousands of his holy ones
wang kwac 	(metaph) small hole in a cloth which makes the body seen 
dako oringo ma labeno bolle ni bel bel ngeye 	the woman ran off at a high speed with the loin dress swinging side to side behind her, 
kella cam acam 	bring some food for me to eat 
lul gum lobo ogol yoo wek ogeng dano ringgo matek ki motoka i yoo meno 	make a heap of earth across the road to prevent the people from driving fast with their cars on that road
Ci ocoyo waraga ma kwanne kit man: 	He wrote a letter as follows:
dako la iye onat ber mada 	a slender woman is very beautiful
Maliam owaco ni, “Kwona pako Rwot, 	And Mary said: “My soul glorifies the Lord
lupoya joo ma wii gi oballe ma gitiyo nyo gilokko gin ma dano me ninino ducu pe tiyo nyo lokko 	the mad people are people whose mental conditions have gone out and do or say things which normal people cannot say or do
lacce tye iye remo 	his urine has blood in it 
ororo me cam nyo kongo 	strong lover of food or beer
odoko opoko-yok pa dano 	he has become a laughing stock for the people 
lacwee camo ki otako	a potter eats off a potsherd
ticce oran woko 	the work did not take place
cik agwak nyo kwakala me makko lee 	set up a metal trap for catching the animals 
bem litino man wek wanen kitte ma bem meeri tek kwedde 	charm these children so that we may see how powerful your charm is
an pud aa ka twoo twatwal wek wunu kong ajig ma peya acakko tic	I have just come from a serious sickness, let me first recuperate or get better or strong, before starting work
Bot jo ma pud peya gunyomo, ki bot mon ma coggi oto, awaco kit man ni, bedo ber ka kono gubedo macalo an. 	Now to the unmarried and the widows I say: It is good for them to stay unmarried, as I do.
jalle ka omatto kongo ci dogge dong doko rep mada 	when the fellow has taken alcohol he becomes very talkative
Dok bene i kare ma doŋ Pilato obedo i wi kom me ŋolo kop, dakone ocwalo kwena bote ni, “Pe itim gin mo i kom dano meno ma kite atir-ri, pien tin i waŋ lek aneno can madit twatwal pire.” 	For he knew it was out of self-interest that they had handed Jesus over to him.
ento ŋat mo-ni ma tye ka balo cwinywu woko-ni, kadi bed en aŋa, Lubaŋa biŋolle kop. 	I am confident in the Lord that you will take no other view
en dong o oo paco 	he has arrived at home 
miya moko 	give me some 
ento wun wumi botgi cam gucam.” 	Jesus replied, “They do not need to go away
Gunyere matek, pien giŋeyo ni nyako-ni oto woko. 	They laughed at him, knowing that she was dead.
latinne ngoro pien Latin abwogga	the child is weak because he was born before full term
gallo wii welo ki tukko mogo 	entertaining the guests with some plays
I kare meno Petero iye obedo ka kalo akala kun tamo ni gin ma eneno i waŋ lek man nyuto gin aŋo? Nen, jo ma Kornelio ocwalogi gubedo ka penyo pi ot pa Cimon, kun gucuŋ i dog ot, 	While Peter was wondering about the meaning of the vision, the men sent by Cornelius found out where Simon’s house was and stopped at the gate.
Dako mo me Camaria obino ka twomo pii. Yecu owacce ni, “Miya pii, amati.” 	It was about noon.
Openyogi ni, “Piŋo wulwor kit man? Wun pe wutye ki niye?” 	He said to his disciples, “Why are you so afraid? Do you still have no faith?”
cwinynye tye ka ryangge 	he is very much frightened 
dano mapol gubinno ka jukko cwinynye mada	many people came to console him 
litino gi aye ma gimaarro gwello cet i kabeddo atata 	children are the ones who do pass large faeces in various places
ngaddo lwet pe tek	trimming the nails is not difficult 
nyetto laa 	to spit the spittle
dye poto obar mada pi lyeto pa piny, nyo dye poto obarro mada pi lyeto piny 	the ground in the field is badly cracked because of the heat
Giyene bene me miyo yweyo i cal lee ma giyubo ca wek omi cal lee-nu olok lok, dok bene wek omi jo ma pe gibiworo cal lee-nu ginekgi woko. 	The second beast was given power to give breath to the image of the first beast, so that the image could speak and cause all who refused to worship the image to be killed.
Ento an awaco botwu ni, dano mo ma neno dako ce paro ni ebed kwede, meno noŋo doŋ otimo abor woko kwede ki i cwinye. 	But I tell you that anyone who looks at a woman lustfully has already committed adultery with her in his heart.
gucitto ka gollo wii lapwonygi	they went to welcome their teacher
Kadi bed giony remona me bedo macalo gityer amata ma gionyo i wi keno tyer, kun niyewu kacel ki ticwu bote bedo macalo mot ma gitumo bot Lubaŋa, an gira cwinya yom kacel ki wun ducu. 	so that you may become blameless and pure, “children of God without fault in a warped and crooked generation.” Then you will shine among them like stars in the sky
Ento Yecu openye ni, “Juda, in idobo Wod pa dano ki noto lem?” 	but Jesus asked him, “Judas, are you betraying the Son of Man with a kiss?”
kaa kal ma i potoni ityek woko 	harvest all the millet in the field
Yecu owacce ni, “Adada awacciwu ni, pe tye ŋatti mo ma oweko ode, nyo omege, nyo nyimege, nyo minne, nyo wonne, nyo litino, nyo pottine, pira ki pi lok me kwena maber, 	“Truly I tell you,” Jesus replied, “no one who has left home or brothers or sisters or mother or father or children or fields for me and the gospel
nyakoni pe oto ento onino anina.” Ci gin gunyere anyera. 	he said, “Go away
peny ka en owinynyo lokke 	ask whether he heard about the case 
“Cimon, Cimon, nen Catan otyeko penyo piwu me apyeta macalo bel, 	“Simon, Simon, Satan has asked to sift all of you as wheat.
Dano meno owilo poto ki lim ma onoŋo pi tim aranyine, ka opoto aryeba cwiny ci iye otyer obar woko, cin iye owukke woko ducu. 	(With the payment he received for his wickedness, Judas bought a field; there he fell headlong, his body burst open and all his intestines spilled out.
pud latin, tic ma kit eno pud ngayo woko 	he is still a child, such work too much for him
lyer awal i kor ot	hang suspend the gourd plate on the wall
opotto i wii dudde ci oturro layog-gecce woko 	she fell down on her buttocks and broke her loin dress 
Ento i cwiny dyewor Paulo ki Cira gubedo ka lega ki ka wero wer bot Lubaŋa ma lumabuc bene giwinyogi. 	About midnight Paul and Silas were praying and singing hymns to God, and the other prisoners were listening to them.
muno otuuro lupyem woko 	the whites broke down the dissidents 
yikke obeddo lok madit mada 	burial is a very important matter
jol ii ki pul en 	eat some of the groundnuts here which will keep you going
Wun jo Korint, wan doŋ waloko kwedwu ka maleŋ, dok bene doŋ wayabo cwinywa botwu malac. 	through glory and dishonor, bad report and good report; genuine, yet regarded as impostors;
Lupwonnye gunenne kekengi, pe guniaŋ ŋat ma en oloko i kome. 	After he had said this, Jesus was troubled in spirit and testified, “Very truly I tell you, one of you is going to betray me.”
ocubbo opacco apacca  	he speared it superficially
Dano mo twero bedo ki niye me camo gin mo keken, ento ŋat ma niyene goro camo pot dek keken. 	Accept the one whose faith is weak, without quarreling over disputable matters.
wangge tek  	cannot be deceived, cunning, subtle, clear sighted
Omiyo Lujudaya guwaco ni, “Nen, yam mare mada.” 	Jesus wept.
Ka lupwonnyene Yakobo ki Jon guneno, guwaco ni, “Rwot, imito wacik mac oa ki i polo, otyekgi woko?” 	When the disciples James and John saw this, they asked, “Lord, do you want us to call fire down from heaven to destroy them?”
Yalwak pa jo maraco ki lutim abor yenyo lanyut, ento pe gibimiyo botgi lanyut mo kono lanyut pa Yona keken.” Ci oa woko ki botgi ocito ka mukene. 	A wicked and adulterous generation looks for a sign, but none will be given it except the sign of Jonah.” Jesus then left them and went away.
Yecu odokke iye ni, “Adada awacci ni, dano ka pe ginywale tyen me aryo pe twero neno ker pa Lubaŋa.” 	For no one could perform the signs you are doing if God were not with him.”
maraya me nenno piny 	a pair of spectacles
lwer pot labolo kipokke ma otwoo waoko 	cut the dried banana leaves and their barks
curru pii i dek 	pouring Much water into sauce 
man nama abic 	this is number five 
ony bel i aduko 	pour corn into the basket
gwok litino gweni okwata pe omakgi 	protect the chicken against the kites 
ka iwok ki kuno ci jaa get paco 	if you are going there pass near the home
wacirwatte i akara-kara yoo	we shall meet at the fork of the road 
yat ma caggo abaar wic oyot oyot en aye acipirin 	aspirin is the drug that cures headache quickly 
En myero omedde, ento an myero adok piny.” 	That joy is mine, and it is now complete.
ajwaka pe cago kanca  	A witch doctor cannot cure cancer
put wunnu pul woko matye i poto tin 	uproot the groundnuts from the field today 
pam kom ot man ki lobo 	plaster the walls of this house with clay
wonne opillo wiye ki dyel i kare ma okatto peny 	his father honoured him by killing a goat when he passed his examinations 
Lubaŋa oyero gin mogo me lobo ma gicayogi, ma rwomgi piny, kadi jami mogo ma pe gitye, wek omi gin ma tye odok gin ata, 	God chose the lowly things of this world and the despised things—and the things that are not—to nullify the things that are,
tucco gin ma dano moo otiyo pe ber 	betraying somebody of what he has done is not good
ka ma kwidi ma camogi pe to, ki macce bene pe to. 	where “‘the worms that eat them do not die, and the fire is not quenched.’
Dok owaco bot luticce ni, “Karama doŋ giyubo, ento jo ma onoŋo nene gilwoŋogi pe doŋ gimyero. 	The rest seized his servants, mistreated them and killed them.
Waturo kwede tam ma pe atir, ki kit wakke ducu ma tiŋŋe me pyem, ma geŋo dano miyo pe giŋeyo Lubaŋa, kun wamako tam acel acel macalo opii, waketo i te loc pa Kricito. 	For though we live in the world, we do not wage war as the world does.
wek doŋ gikwanwa ni kitwa atir pi kicane, wek omi wanoŋ kwo ma pe tum ma genwa tye iye. 	whom he poured out on us generously through Jesus Christ our Savior,
Ento ryeko pa Lubaŋa oloyo kop pi litinone ducu.” 	But wisdom is proved right by all her children.”
Wan wacoyo botwu lok i kom gin mubedo tye nia i acakki piny, ma wan kikomwa wawinyo, dok bene waneno ki waŋwa. Wanene ada, dok wamulo kome ki ciŋwa, en lok me kwo. 	That which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked at and our hands have touched—this we proclaim concerning the Word of life.
Ento maca ma gicoyogi i ŋom maber-ri, gin aye jo ma giwinyo lok, ci gigamo, ginyako nyiggi, mukene pyeradek, mukene pyerabicel, mukene miya.” 	Others, like seed sown on good soil, hear the word, accept it, and produce a crop—some thirty, some sixty, some a hundred times what was sown.”
Polo ki lobo gibitum ento lokka pe bitum. 	Heaven and earth will pass away, but my words will never pass away.
Ka ce Cwiny pa ŋat ma ocero Yecu ki i kin jo muto-ni bedo i iwu, en Ŋat ma ocero Kricito Yecu ki i kin jo muto-ni bene bimiyo kwo kadi wa i komwu ma doŋ oto woko, pi Cwiny mere ma bedo i iwu-ni. 	But if Christ is in you, then even though your body is subject to death because of sin, the Spirit gives life because of righteousness.
okwille akwilla ka odonynyo i ot	he came stealthily and then entered the house or he came quietly and silently and then entered the house
radde gicello tyenne ci racac ocitto olig woko i cogo pe okatto pil 	he was shot on the leg but the bullet went and stopped in the bone but did not go through
Man aye got ma wun lugedo wukwero woko ento ma odoko got madit me twok ot. 	Jesus is “‘the stone you builders rejected, which has become the cornerstone.’
pido banya i kot 	suing for payment of the debt before the court
cam pudi tye oluu 	the food is not yet complete 
pien aŋeyo ni, kare me weko koma doŋ cok, kit macalo Rwotwa Yecu Kricito yam onyutta kwede. 	because I know that I will soon put it aside, as our Lord Jesus Christ has made clear to me.
I Licitra onoŋo tye laco mo ma bedo abeda kun pe woto ki tyene	In Lystra there sat a man who was lame
gin bicitto i London i dwee me Julai i mwaka man 	they will go to London in July of this year 
Tukiko aoro ocito i Epeco. 	Crescens has gone to Galatia, and Titus to Dalmatia.
nyee itimmo ngoo kany? 	you, you fellow what are you doing here?
Yamo kodo dok ka ma en mito	You should not be surprised at my saying, ‘You must be born again.’
teng apwa woko ki i kom bataniya 	dust the blanket by beating it with stick or shaking
lacoone wiye oballe woko en aye omiyo tye ka wot ludok 	the man is mad that is why he is walking naked 
Ka owaco man, Anania, ajwaka madit, ociko jo ma gucuŋ ka ŋet Paulo ni gudoŋ doge. 	At this the high priest Ananias ordered those standing near Paul to strike him on the mouth.
guur mucumar man matek 	hammer hard this nail 
Pien dano ma lego gimiye, ki ŋat ma yenyo bene noŋo, ki ŋat ma dwoŋo doggola bene gibiyabo doggola bote. 	You hypocrite, first take the plank out of your own eye, and then you will see clearly to remove the speck from your brother’s eye.
daa ii wii dano 	scolding the people
kwidi me twoo man twerro nenne ki maikorocikop keken 	the germs of this disease can only be seen through a microscope 
Pe gilubo welo, ento giriŋo woko ki bote, pien pe giŋeyo dwan welo.” 	When he has brought out all his own, he goes on ahead of them, and his sheep follow him because they know his voice.
Jakayo olor oyotoyot, ojole ki yomcwiny. 	So he came down at once and welcomed him gladly.
Gin yam gudyero kwogi pi laro kwona	Greet Priscilla and Aquila, my co-workers in Christ Jesus.
akwerro ni pe laworo acitto gang	I denied that yesterday I went home
nyatto lok 	to speak incessantly about something
dok iwar pa oget	to return to Oget's sandles
Genwa ki yomcwinywa ki lalukana me nyattewa i nyim Rwot Yecu Kricito i dwogone, en gin aŋo? Pe wun? 	For what is our hope, our joy, or the crown in which we will glory in the presence of our Lord Jesus when he comes? Is it not you?
ci doŋ wabibedo kacel ki Rwot nakanaka. 	And so we will be with the Lord forever.
laa kwac ber ma katto ducu 	leopard's skin is very beautiful 
in latin ma tidi myerro pe iwotto otyeno 	you small child, should not walk in the evening
en twoo twoo me cukari 	he is suffering from diabetes 
pii yenynyo gunynye 	boiling water bubbles simmers 
Ka giterowu i nyim kacokke ki i nyim luloc ki wegi twer, pe wubed ka tamo kit ma myero wulok kwede, nyo ni wubigamo niŋniŋ, nyo ni kit lok aŋo ma wubiloko. 	“When you are brought before synagogues, rulers and authorities, do not worry about how you will defend yourselves or what you will say,
Yecu owaco botgi ni, “Nen, ka wudonyo i gaŋ me Jerucalem, ci laco mo birwatte kwedwu kun oyeyo agulu pii	He replied, “As you enter the city, a man carrying a jar of water will meet you
mwoc pa kot poyo kom dano 	thundering of the rain startles the people
litino gitye ka peny 	the children are in (writing) examinations 
latin twerro pyelle kany 	the child can be laid here
twoo abar-wic-leela nino ducu miye gok	severe headache always makes him vomit
ento ka doŋ oloko, gucako daŋŋe ki dwan maloŋo ni, “Wutere, wuneke woko! Dano macalo meno pe romo bedo i lobo!” 	Then they raised their voices and shouted, “Rid the earth of him! He’s not fit to live!”
litino gitye ka woo 	the children are shouting or making noise
Kadi bed wa yer wiwu ducu bene doŋ gikwanogi woko liweŋ. Pe wulwor	Indeed, the very hairs of your head are all numbered
oturro ala tyenne woko	he broke his tibia, 
ka gucito gutito pire bot Yecu bene. 	John’s disciples came and took his body and buried it
kicce twerro totte 	the honey can be collected
Utmegina, oduro mono twero nyak yaa? Nyo olok twero nyak oduro? Kit meno pii mamit bene pe twero mol kun a ki i waŋ it ma piine obedo kado kado. 	My brothers and sisters, can a fig tree bear olives, or a grapevine bear figs? Neither can a salt spring produce fresh water.
goddo gutte ka neno winyo i gee ot	stretching his neck to see the bird behind the house 
obokko pok yat odokko bongo 	he has beaten thoroughly the bark of a tree to become a cloth
ceng yoo man woko wek dano pe guwok ki kany 	the'way to go to England to study has now been closed
en retto dano mada 	always throws people down 
caano dano pe ber	looking down upon people is not good
odiggo itte woko  	he decided not to listen or pretended not to have heard
onongo myerro amiine gweni apar wiye aryo ento abumme woko ki gweni aryo amiine dong gwenni apar keken	I should have given him twelve chicken but I swindled him with two chicken and instead I gave him only ten chicken
Ka ma weko bal tye iye, gitum mo pi bal doŋ pe mitte. 	And where these have been forgiven, sacrifice for sin is no longer necessary.
ket deyo i kom Wodi, wek Wodi bene oket deyo i komi, 	After Jesus said this, he looked toward heaven and prayed: “Father, the hour has come
danone maarro tanynye ki daa mada 	the man likes bursting out with rage quarrelling 
Wubed ki tam i kome, ki kit ma en ociro kwede adagadaga marac twatwal ki bot lubalo, wek pe wuol, ki cwinywu pe opoti. 	Consider him who endured such opposition from sinners, so that you will not grow weary and lose heart.
Ka nino oromo apar wiye aŋwen, ma yamo terowa i dye nam me Adria, i cwiny dyewor, lukwaŋ gutamo ni tye lobo mo ma cok kwedwa. 	On the fourteenth night we were still being driven across the Adriatic Sea, when about midnight the sailors sensed they were approaching land.
akeyo ka giteddo acwinynya ne ci mit mada	when akeyo is cooked as a thick sauce mixed with simsim, it is very tasty
pit ikare man tek mada pien wel jami ducu dong tye malo twatwal 	pit in these days is very difficult because the costs of things have gone up very high
opye ni tik i ngom 	he jumped and landed firmly on the ground 
pany en aye gin me oddo bel 	pany is a motar for pounding cereals 
Ento Lujudaya gurubo i mon ma giworo Lubaŋa ma gitye i rwom me dito ma malo, kacel ki ludito me gaŋ ma giloyo dano, ci gubalo cwinygi woko	But the Jewish leaders incited the God-fearing women of high standing and the leading men of the city
Ka watuco balwa, en genne dok kite atir, biweko balwa, dok bilwoko tim maraco ma tye i komwa ducu. 	If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just and will forgive us our sins and purify us from all unrighteousness.
Wun lugoba! Lanebi Icaya yam oloko i komwu kakare i kare ma en owacci, 	But you say that if anyone declares that what might have been used to help their father or mother is ‘devoted to God,’
teer dyel gucimat pii i laora 	take the goats to drink the water from the river
awal man twerro tucce 	the gourd plate can be pierced
yatte robbo kom dano ka i wirro 	the medicine makes the skin peel off if you smear it on the body, causing blisters of skin or ulceration
ka otimo kit meno, ci biyeco manyen-ni woko, dok kiraka ma i kom manyen-ni pe birwatte ki muti-ni. 	He told them this parable: “No one tears a piece out of a new garment to patch an old one
Lok man oywek i kin utmego, ni lapwonnye man pe bito	Jesus answered, “If I want him to remain alive until I return, what is that to you? You must follow me.”
Ento lobo okonyo dako-nu, lobo oŋamo doge ci omwonyo kulu meno ma onoŋo min kulu oŋoko woko ki i doge-ni. 	But the earth helped the woman by opening its mouth and swallowing the river that the dragon had spewed out of his mouth.
ngat ma lacoor mitto gon 	an impostor or a daring person needs to be told off or booed 
lanen tye kwene ma nyutto ni in iieyo goyo cal maber 	where is the example to show that you know how to paint very well? 
dano ma nino ducu parro mada pi bongo, waar nyo gin ducu ma orukko ni obed maber adada 	a person who always cares about his clothes, shoes or anything that he has worn to be very proper
gwin ringo meeri ma imakko maber ki cigui pien ka gweno onenno ci koni form woko ki i chili 	eat your meat bit by bit which you must hold well because if the chicken sees it it might pick it from you
yutto buk woko ki i cingge  	snatching away a book from her
In Euodia ki in Cintuke, alegowu me bedo ki cwiny acel i Rwot. 	Therefore, my brothers and sisters, you whom I love and long for, my joy and crown, stand firm in the Lord in this way, dear friends!
Wumot Ampuliato, ma en larema ma amaro i Rwot. 	Greet Mary, who worked very hard for you.
lukwaya pot mada ma oket orommo piny wii lobo ducu 	my grandchildren are very many who have scattered all over the world
kel pil me amatta 	bring some water for drinking 
dano myero gulwor twee i jero 	people should be afraid of being imprisoned in the jail 
pud tye ki tino omiyo lokko kumeno	he is still childish that is why he speaks like that 
cki wu kkii 	clean the grinding stone
lwak tong gweno ma giteerro ka cattone ni guo piny ci gutoo woko liweng 	the chicken's eggs that were being taken to be sold all fell down and got broken
ruk oturre aturra tin ki wor 	she was surprised by the sudden onset of menstruation today at night
Pi niye Rakab ma obedo malaya pe oto kacel ki jo ma pe gubedo luwiny, pien onoŋo en yam ojolo lurot-piny ki kuc. 	By faith the prostitute Rahab, because she welcomed the spies, was not killed with those who were disobedient.
citto ka nammo i wang oo	going to the fireplace where people are sitting, to pass time
moo ma bwogo 	freshly made butter before it is processed
Yecu odok iye ni, “Pud pe wukwano lok ma wacci, cakke i acakki piny Lacwec ocweyogi co ki mon? 	“Haven’t you read,” he replied, “that at the beginning the Creator ‘made them male and female,’
Doŋ aneno, dok atito lok me caden i kome ni, man en Wod pa Lubaŋa.” 	Then John gave this testimony: “I saw the Spirit come down from heaven as a dove and remain on him.
Ŋat ma gilwoŋo me bedo i Kricito ma onoŋo en opii, en aye dano ma Rwot doŋ ogonyo woko ki i opii. Kit meno bene, ŋat ma onoŋo lone kene ka gilwoŋe, doŋ odoko opii pa Kricito. 	For the one who was a slave when called to faith in the Lord is the Lord’s freed person; similarly, the one who was free when called is Christ’s slave.
pokko dyel macol kom matar 	separating black goats from the white ones
buur tye i wii cunne 	he has a penile sore 
Dano gibibino kun gia ki tuŋ wokceŋ, ki tuŋ potoceŋ, ki yo tuŋ acam, ki tuŋ yo acuc, gibibedo piny i dog cam i ker pa Lubaŋa. 	People will come from east and west and north and south, and will take their places at the feast in the kingdom of God.
cekko me paipai nen ka komme ducu dong obeddo ocwak ocwak  	the ripening of a paw paw is seen when its body is completely yellow
yer wiye odin ni cany 	his hair has grown heavily 
Pi niye waniaŋ ni, Lubaŋa yam oketo lobo kulu ki lokke, mumiyo gin ma nen gitiyo nia ki i kom gin ma pe nen. 	By faith we understand that the universe was formed at God’s command, so that what is seen was not made out of what was visible.
guggo ka legga  	to kneel down to pray
awobe adii ma ngeyo myello myel bwola 	how many boys who do know how to dance bwola 
wotto ni met met 	walking very slowly 
nyako meno nyiŋe Maliam. 	The virgin’s name was Mary.
lworre pien en dano mageer mada 	fear him because he is a very cruel person
komwu gum mada ka commo i kom Okot 	you are very lucky to meet Okot unexpectedly 
teneci en aye tuko ma dano maarro mada pien miyo kom beddo ma yot 	tennis is a game which is liked very much by many people because it makes them fit  
dano ducu ma twerro lwongge, wulwonggi gubin 	every person who can be called, call them to come 
lacoo mo ma lagirigiri oretto twon dano mo piny 	a very short person has thrown down a very big person
yenynye me nonggo kama gikanno iye luduko oollo dano mada 	to search for where the gun was hidden tired people completely
bii nyim wek inog iye moo 	squeeze the simsim in order to extract oil from it
En obino bot Yecu dyewor, owacce ni, “Lapwony, waŋeyo ni in lapwony ma ia ki bot Lubaŋa	Now there was a Pharisee, a man named Nicodemus who was a member of the Jewish ruling council.
Arem me to aye bal, doŋ tek me bal aye cik. 	The sting of death is sin, and the power of sin is the law.
lwer lagada ma i dong kulo woko 	cut the reeds along the bank of the river 
mon gi gitye gang ka teddo 	their wives are at home cooking 
Watito botwu lok pa Rwot ma en owaco, ni, wan jo makwo ma wadoŋ nio wa i nino me dwogo pa Rwot, pe wabitelo nyim jo ma doŋ guto. 	According to the Lord’s word, we tell you that we who are still alive, who are left until the coming of the Lord, will certainly not precede those who have fallen asleep.
Ento ka ce an aryemo cen pi twero pa Cwiny pa Lubaŋa, ci doŋ nen ni ker pa Lubaŋa doŋ obino woko botwu. 	And if I drive out demons by Beelzebul, by whom do your people drive them out? So then, they will be your judges.
pik pii i cupa 	fill the bottle with water
nywakko yoo ki ngati mo 	accompanying with somebody 
en tye i rwom me kapten 	he is now a captain in rank, in other words, he is now a captain
twerro tinggone  	can lift it, or capable of lifting it
kadi Marako, Aristako, Dema ki Luka lutic wadiwa bene gumoti. 	Epaphras, my fellow prisoner in Christ Jesus, sends you greetings.
Gudokke iye ni, “Kono dano man pe latim marac, kono pe wakele boti.” 	So Pilate came out to them and asked, “What charges are you bringing against this man?”
kel olut wek gijwat ki, gwiny latin ni 	bring a stick so that the buttock of this child may be beaten
lim lwar i tee kicaa pa ngati moo noggo catto jami madowong 	money accumulates in someone's bag when one sells many things
Ento kombeddi do? pi to pa Wode ma con odoko dano, en odwokowu woko bote, wek ekelwu i nyime ma noŋo wutye maleŋ, dok bene ma wutye labo?o bal mo, ma lok mo marac pe i komwu. 	and through him to reconcile to himself all things, whether things on earth or things in heaven, by making peace through his blood, shed on the cross.
gin moni tye kany ma gwee ma tik twatwal 	there is something here which smells very badly
gicello labwor ci opotto obutto ni lany kuno 	the lion was short and fell down lying motionless there
Ento jo ma mito bedo lulonyo miyo Catan bitogi ci gipoto i bal, ka doŋ gimoko i owic pa Catan pi mitgi mapol me miŋo ma tye ka unogi, miyo girwenyo dok gito woko matwal. 	But if we have food and clothing, we will be content with that.
wod pa Maat, wod pa Yocek, wod pa Yoda, 	the son of Maath, the son of Mattathias, the son of Semein, the son of Josek, the son of Joda,
pata meggi me doggola man dok kok twatwal ka giyabbo, kel moo iton iye wek pe gukokki 	these hinges make too much noises when the door is being opened, bring oil and put into them to stop the noise 
peyo lawangge otoo ki odoo	to lead the blind man with a stick
“Wuwiny! Lacoc ocito ka coyo kodi. 	“Listen! A farmer went out to sow his seed.
pe gibidira woko cen, pien en tye yo tuŋ ciŋa malacuc. 	Because he is at my right hand, I will not be shaken.
ringone dong ngwecce rac 	the meat now smells badly
ogoyo wiye woko ni pac  	he hit his head and lacerated it
goddo gutte ka neno winyo i gee ot 	contracts his abdomen to show that his stomach is empty
ci gubedo bote i nino meno, pien cawa doŋ onoŋo cok romo apar. 	“Come,” he replied, “and you will see.” So they went and saw where he was staying, and they spent that day with him
Lurema, onoŋo atemo ki tekka ducu me coyo botwu waraga pi lok i kom larre ma wan ducu waribbe iye, ci aneno ni myero aco acuk kwede cwinywu wek wulweny matek pi niye ma yam doŋ gimiyo bot jo pa Lubaŋa kicel ma doŋ otyeko lok ducu. 	Mercy, peace and love be yours in abundance.
pur poto man ci imwol dogge maber 	plough and cut the edges ot the field very well
Lapwonnye meno ma Yecu maro owaco ki petero ni, “Meno Rwot!” Ka Cimon Petero owinyo ni meno Rwot, oruko boŋŋine, pien onoŋo ogonyogi woko pi tic, okworre i nam. 	He said, “Throw your net on the right side of the boat and you will find some.” When they did, they were unable to haul the net in because of the large number of fish.
nyuto joo ma giyerro me cug nyo ma bibeddo pi dano i ot madit me larokop bot dano 	introducing to the people, the persons who will represent the people in the House ot Parliament 
Ka gudok tyen me aryo, ci Yucepu onyutte kekene bot omegine ci gitito bot Parao pi kaka pa Yucepu. 	On their second visit, Joseph told his brothers who he was, and Pharaoh learned about Joseph’s family.
makko goba pa minne	inheriting the habit of lying of his mother
ka kalam tye kunno i tee kitanda, ci twerro mulle ka imullo maber 	if the pen is there under the bed, it can be touched or felt if carefully searched for 
Lubaŋa doŋ oketo jami ducu i te twer pa Kricito wek olo, dok omiye bot lwak jo muye en wek en obed macalo wic, kun loyo jami ducu maber. 	far above all rule and authority, power and dominion, and every name that is invoked, not only in the present age but also in the one to come.
Ka gucokke kacel, ci gupenye ni, “Rwot, i kare man en aye ibidwoko iye ker bot jo Icrael bo?” 	Then they gathered around him and asked him, “Lord, are you at this time going to restore the kingdom to Israel?”
twar winyi woko ki i poto kal 	drive the birds away from the millet field 
man jami meere  	this thing is his 
Ceŋ oryeny i piny macol, ento piny macol pe ogeŋo ryeny. 	In him was life, and that life was the light of all mankind.
wangge leng mada 	she is very beautiful, attractive 
dogge pek ka lok  	his mouth is heavy to speak 
anyaka tye ka lyakko nyim kuno 	a girl is grinding the sim sim to a very fine paste which is almost like butter there
Ka guwoto gubaro i lobo Perugia ki Galatia, ci Cwiny Maleŋ ogeŋogi ni pe gulok lok pa Lubaŋa i Acia. 	Paul and his companions traveled throughout the region of Phrygia and Galatia, having been kept by the Holy Spirit from preaching the word in the province of Asia.
odo ma bor goyo twol ku	a stick which is far away cannot kill a snake
obwotto ticce woko 	he left his work 
Wun co bene wumar monwu i kit macalo Kricito omaro kwede lwak muye en, ci omiyo kwone pigi, 	Now as the church submits to Christ, so also wives should submit to their husbands in everything.
“Ai do, ai do, gaŋ madit-ti oneno can ba, en gaŋ ma yam onoŋo giruko woko ki boŋo camanini maberre, ki boŋŋi ma lamar lamar ki makwar, kun gidero woko ki jabu, kidi me wel, ki tiko matar me wel bene. 	and cry out: “‘Woe! Woe to you, great city, dressed in fine linen, purple and scarlet, and glittering with gold, precious stones and pearls!
Me agikkine ducu, ci bene onen bota, kadi bed abedo calo latin ma gibwogo abwoga. 	and last of all he appeared to me also, as to one abnormally born.
Dok tye kit macalo yam Icaya oloko ni, “Kono nene Rwot me mony pe oweko botwa likwayo mogo, kono wabedo calo Codom, kono doŋ wadoko calo Gomora.” 	For the Lord will carry out his sentence on earth with speed and finality.”
Abilego Won, en bimiyowu Lacuŋudwar mukene ma bibedo kwedwu nakanaka, 	“If you love me, keep my commands.
Pe tye ŋat mo ma ka omato koŋo vino macon ci dok mito manyenne, pien wacci, ‘Macon-ni mit.’ ”	No, new wine must be poured into new wineskins.
ma doŋ odok woko i polo, tye i kabedo me deyo i ŋet Lubaŋa tuŋ acuc, kun lumalaika ki twer ki teko ducu gitye i te locce.	It saves you by the resurrection of Jesus Christ,
pyerre wkii wkii callo pyer pino 	her waist is very small and narrowed like the wasp's
Dako mo onoŋo tye kunnu ma tye ki cen ma okelo goro i kome pi mwaka apar wiye aboro	and a woman was there who had been crippled by a spirit for eighteen years
ka imitto coyo joonu ma gunino ci myerro ired aredda matek 	when you want to wake those people when they are asleep, you must shout very loud
jwaa bogi man ducu maber mada 	iron all these clothes very well 
Apo i kom niyeni ma goba pe iye, ma yam ko? okwoŋo bedo bot dani Loi, ki meni Yuneki, ma aŋeyo atir ma pe akalo akala ni tye boti bene. 	Recalling your tears, I long to see you, so that I may be filled with joy.
dyegi tye ka mokko lapena ma i kolo eno 	the goats are eating the pigeon peas which are in the papyrus mat there 
lemunne twerro cwiine 	the lemon can be sucked
ngen kwon i kado ka dong icam 	roll kwon in salt and then eat it 
Ka oloko kwede ci odonyo i ot, onoŋo lwak dano gucokke iye. 	While talking with him, Peter went inside and found a large gathering of people.
Wumot bene Acinkerito, Pelegon, Keremec, Patroba, Keremac ki utmego ma gitye kacel kwedgi. 	Greet Rufus, chosen in the Lord, and his mother, who has been a mother to me, too.
ket latin i ngee mine  	place the child on the back of his mother
Dok ka obinen dano mo ma pe biwinyo lanebi meno, waŋe birwenyo woko ki i kin lutugi.’ 	Anyone who does not listen to him will be completely cut off from their people.’
gerro otte twerro cakke 	building the house can be started
Laloyo oye Yecu ka oneno gin ma otimme-ni, pien obedo ka uro kit pwony ma gimiyo i kom Rwot. 	When the proconsul saw what had happened, he believed, for he was amazed at the teaching about the Lord.
Ento Yecu ogamo ni, “Pe wujuke	“Do not stop him,” Jesus said
Lacen Paulo ki luwote gukwaŋ gua ki i Papo, gucito i Perga i lobo Pampulia. Jon owekogi odok woko i Jerucalem. 	From Paphos, Paul and his companions sailed to Perga in Pamphylia, where John left them to return to Jerusalem.
moo dyang ka pe giketto kama gic ci mee woko  	if butter is not put in a cold place, it melts away
tir kitti ka imitti ibed maber ki dano	change your behaviour if you want people to get on well with you 
Gugwelo wonne ni en mito cako nyiŋe aŋa? 	Then they made signs to his father, to find out what he would like to name the child.
lapaa yat nyo lapac maber tye kwene?  	where is the ngood carpenter here?
i kare meno bene gugonyo tol ma onoŋo gutweyo ki pol ma giwiro ki mel, ka doŋ guŋabo boŋo matidi ki tuŋ nyime wek yamo omaki, ci guweko mel omol owoto kun kemo tura. 	Then they hoisted the foresail to the wind and made for the beach.
twoo gemo omakko woko 	he is infected with one of the infectious diseases
Kot ocwer, lalele omol matek, ci yamo okodo matek i kom ot meno oyeŋo, ento ot pe opoto, pien te gutine gikwinyo i kom pata. 	“Therefore everyone who hears these words of mine and puts them into practice is like a wise man who built his house on the rock.
nyok romo ogele 	a big fully grown young ram 
man gari pa litino 	this is the children's bicycle
doŋ ilarre keni, a woko ki i kom yatariya!” 	come down from the cross and save yourself!”
Piŋo pe watimo gin marac wek gin maber oa iye? Pien tye jo mogo ma gicoko dogwa ki lok goba ma giwacci wan waloko kumeno. Ka giŋolo kop oloyo jo macalo meno noŋo giŋolo kakare. 	Someone might argue, “If my falsehood enhances God’s truthfulness and so increases his glory, why am I still condemned as a sinner?”
Ento ka lupur guneno wode, gucako lok kekengi ni, ‘Man aye doŋ lale lim	Then he sent other servants to them, more than the first time, and the tenants treated them the same way.
bok pul ma gulo wek wamwoddi 	boil the unshelled groundnuts so that we may eat them
gol cingwu 	hold your hands hooked together 
latin lacoo latin nyako loyerro pe gubed ka nyebbe ka cod 	a boy and a girl must not get used illegal sexual intercourse
yatte myello kom dano 	the medicine makes the body shakes
ento ŋat ma donyo ki i doggola, en lakwat romi. 	This was the second sign Jesus performed after coming from Judea to Galilee.
ento pe gunoŋo gin mo ma myero gutim i kome, pien dano ducu guketo cwinygi ka winyo lokke.	Yet they could not find any way to do it, because all the people hung on his words.
cwakko lok i kin dano aryo wek gulweny 	to instigate the two people so that they can fight
pien onoŋo aketo cwinya me tito lok me kwena maber ka ma yam dano peya guwinyo nyiŋ Kricito, wek omi pe aket gedo i wi guti ma yam doŋ ŋat mukene ocako gero iye mere, 	So from Jerusalem all the way around to Illyricum, I have fully proclaimed the gospel of Christ.
Lok mayotte tye kwene ka awaco bot latwo ni, ‘Balli doŋ giweko woko’, kono nyo ni, ‘A malo wek itiŋ kabutoni, icit wa paco’? 	Which is easier: to say to this paralyzed man, ‘Your sins are forgiven,’ or to say, ‘Get up, take your mat and walk’?
kayo ni jik-jik 	bites with no effect 
pe iput tee okono woko 	do not uproot the pumpkin, but it means that, when you are taking something from some where do not take the whole thing but leave some 
ryammo gwok woko ki i ot 	chasing or driving away the dog from the house 
pim me cello luduko	to aim to shoot the guns
Dwan dok obino bote tyen me aryone ni, “Gin ma Lubaŋa olonyo in pe ilwoŋ ni obedo me kwer.” 	The voice spoke to him a second time, “Do not call anything impure that God has made clean.”
Ka ce laloc biwinyo lok man, ci wan wabiniaŋe ki lok ducu, wek can mo pe opot i komwu.” 	telling them, “You are to say, ‘His disciples came during the night and stole him away while we were asleep.’
cikella pii baa 	please bring me some water
pee dyegi aryo magi iteergi paco 	pull along these two goats and take them home
Pi meno myero wapwoyu Lubaŋa, pien doŋ wanoŋo ker ma pe twero yeŋŋe, dok bene myero waworu Lubaŋa i yo ma twero yomo cwinye, kun bene wamiye deyo ki lworo, 	Therefore, since we are receiving a kingdom that cannot be shaken, let us be thankful, and so worship God acceptably with reverence and awe,
Gugamo ni, “Watwero.” 	“We can,” they answered
Ka awaŋo cwinywu, ci aŋa ma biyomo cwinya? Pe en dano ma awaŋo cwinye-ni? 	So I made up my mind that I would not make another painful visit to you.
Petero owacce ni, “In pe ibilwoko tyena matwal.” Yecu odokke iye ni, “Ka pe alwoki, noŋo ribbe pe i kinwa.” 	Jesus replied, “You do not realize now what I am doing, but later you will understand.”
kec laparanat miyo dano mapol giringgo woko ki i lobogi gicitto I lobo mukene 	severe famine makes many people run away from their countries and go to other countries 
Kadi bed kumeno, yeya mukene ma gia Tiberia gubino cok ki kabedo ka ma dano gucamo iye kwon ma Rwot opwoyo. 	The next day the crowd that had stayed on the opposite shore of the lake realized that only one boat had been there, and that Jesus had not entered it with his disciples, but that they had gone away alone.
pien Lubaŋa aye ma tye ka tic i cwinywu, kun miyowu miti ki teko me tic, wek wun wuyom cwinye. 	Therefore, my dear friends, as you have always obeyed—not only in my presence, but now much more in my absence—continue to work out your salvation with fear and trembling,
cakke pudi twerro cwide, wek latin ockid 	the milk can still be sucked let the child suck 
laduur laremme pe 	a miser or a stingy person has no friends 
awobe maarro mada goyo lukeme 	the boys like very much to play lukeme 
I dyewor ma Kerode mito kele iye woko-ni, onoŋo Petero obuto onino i kin askari aryo, ma gitweye woko ki nyor aryo, ki lukur-piny bene onoŋo gitye ka kuro dog ot mabuc. 	The night before Herod was to bring him to trial, Peter was sleeping between two soldiers, bound with two chains, and sentries stood guard at the entrance.
Ka Kricito ma en kwowa binen, wun bene wubinen kacel kwede i deyo. 	For you died, and your life is now hidden with Christ in God.
ce paro lok me lobo man, ki maro lonyo, ki miti me jami mukene, ka odonyo i cwinygi ci diyo lok, pe nyak. 	but the worries of this life, the deceitfulness of wealth and the desires for other things come in and choke the word, making it unfruitful.
Gua gucito i kin gaŋ, gutito lok me kwena maber kun gicaŋo lutwo bene i kabedo ducu. 	So they set out and went from village to village, proclaiming the good news and healing people everywhere.
dye oddi maditto gicweyo ki mabul 	floors of big buildings are made of marble tiles 
litino man wiigi pil mada i kom dano 	these children are very arrogant to people 
kel canduk me bongo 	bring a box for the clothes
Cakke wa i kom Moses, ki lunebi ducu, en ogonyo botgi lok ducu ma i ginacoya ma mako kome. 	Did not the Messiah have to suffer these things and then enter his glory?”
jo mukene ma gudoŋŋe gumako luticce, gutimogi ki tim me lewic, ci gunekogi woko. 	“But they paid no attention and went off—one to his field, another to his business.
labolo nyalo too ma neke	banana plan produces death which kills itself
en lagal dano 	he always makes people late
tud uno i ngut dyel 	knot the rope around the neck of the goat
Cir arem me gin marac ma gitimo i komi, kit macalo askari maber pa Yecu Kricito. 	And the things you have heard me say in the presence of many witnesses entrust to reliable people who will also be qualified to teach others.
ŋat mo ma niaŋ bene pe, ŋat mo ma yenyo Lubaŋa bene pe. 	Why not say—as some slanderously claim that we say—“Let us do evil that good may result”? Their condemnation is just!
En ocako co woko ci ojuko yamo, owaco ki nam ni, “Liŋ, pye mot.” Yamo ocako kwe, nam oliŋ mot. 	He got up, rebuked the wind and said to the waves, “Quiet! Be still!” Then the wind died down and it was completely calm.
Ento yer wiwu acel mo pe birwenyo. 	But not a hair of your head will perish.
Dano ma lanyut me twer me caŋo dano otimme i kome-ni onoŋo doŋ dit ma mwakane kato ka pyeraŋwen woko. 	For the man who was miraculously healed was over forty years old.
nen lwakki lee man ka gitye ka cam i puto 	look at the very many animals which are grazing in the grazing field 
wukwo kicaa lim ma pe ti, wukan lonyo ma pe tum i polo, ka ma lakwo pe o iye, dok nyenye pe balo. 	Provide purses for yourselves that will not wear out, a treasure in heaven that will never fail, where no thief comes near and no moth destroys.
kom agulu matto pi, ci pii ne jwiine katto woko i komme ni jwu, ci dyako komme woko 	the wall of the pot imbibes the water and the water percolates through making its body wet
en doki tiyo jami arwii twatwal 	he always does things in the wrong way
pacco dek 	taking a good amount of food with fingers
it latinne nenni tye ka perre medde amedda 	the child's ears seem to becoming wide and wider 
lacoc me nyim man nene pe ocoyo maber  	a sower of this simsim did not sow it well
anyira gubinno ma abwol i gut ciggi ryeny ni lyak lyak	the girls came with the copper wristlets on their wrists shining brightly
pimmo lee ki luduko me acella	aiming at animals with the gun for shooting
otany i komme ki daa 	he set upon him with furious quarrelling
ento bergi myero onen i tic maber ma gitiyo, meno en gin ma mitte bot mon ma gilwoŋŋe kengi ni gin jo ma woro Lubaŋa. 	Therefore I want the men everywhere to pray, lifting up holy hands without anger or disputing.
kado dek bit ni ryac 	the salt in the sauce is too much or bitter
en wok ki kwene? 	which way does he pass? 
naka nen onogo watye ka kwan 	a moment ago when we were studying
latinne gaddo cam twatwal callo tye ki kwkii iiye 	the child eats too much or excessively as though he has worms in his abdomen
dwong pa aribe omiyo litino makko gi mada ki wino 	because they are too many, this make it easy for the children to catch many of them by trapping them with cow's tail hair traps
Cimon Petero, Tomaci ma gilwoŋo ni Baŋi, Natanael me Kana me Galilaya, litino pa Jebedayo ki jo aryo mukene i kin lupwonnyene onoŋo gitye kacel. 	Then they all went home,
pongo en aye lak lyec ma gitonggo doko ogul ma girukko i bad macallo ogul, ento gilwonggo ni pongo pe ogul 	pongo is an ivory which has been cut into a ring that is normally worn round the arm as armlet
ento wan jo me dyeceŋ myero wabed jo ma wagwokke. Waruku niye ki mar gubed nyonyo me geŋo korwa, waruku bene gen me larre obed tok wiwa me lweny. 	But since we belong to the day, let us be sober, putting on faith and love as a breastplate, and the hope of salvation as a helmet.
yanggo dano gin matek mada	operating on the people is very difficult
pi jamine madowong ma etye kwedde twatwal omiyo dano ducu guketto giggi woko i komme 	because of the many things that he has made, many people have rancour against him 
Jo ducu tye ki mot me caŋo dano? Jo ducu gidumo leb mapatpat? Jo ducu gin lugony leb? 	Do all have gifts of healing? Do all speak in tongues? Do all interpret?
I dini pa Lujudaya an aye ma onoŋo aloyo jo mapol ma gin yalwakka ma gin jo me rokka, kun aketo cwinya adada me lubo kit me tekwaro pa kwarowa. 	For you have heard of my previous way of life in Judaism, how intensely I persecuted the church of God and tried to destroy it.
latin kok pi gin angoo? 	what is the child crying for?
Pien i Kricito lirre nyo bedo ma pe giliro ducu konygi pe	For through the Spirit we eagerly await by faith the righteousness for which we hope.
lanyam pa Anek dong opong ki bur keken 	the mouth of Anek is full of covered with sores
Ŋat acel i kingi ma nyiŋe Kelopa, odok iye bote ni, “In i welo keni i Jerucalem ce, ma pe iŋeyo lok ma otimme kunnu i kare man?” 	He asked them, “What are you discussing together as you walk along?” They stood still, their faces downcast.
Yecu ocike ni, “Nen ni pe iwaco lok man bot ŋat mo	A man with leprosy came and knelt before him and said, “Lord, if you are willing, you can make me clean.”
Ento kiniga omakogi matek, guporo lok i kingi kekengi, gin ma myero gitim i kom Yecu. 	But the Pharisees and the teachers of the law were furious and began to discuss with one another what they might do to Jesus.
Ka Paulo okato woko ki botgi, owoto gire. 	At that, Paul left the Council.
Ento jo mogo gubino ki i Judaya ma gupwonyo utmego ni, “Ka pe gilirowu macalo kit pa Moses tye, pe wutwero larre.” 	Certain people came down from Judea to Antioch and were teaching the believers: “Unless you are circumcised, according to the custom taught by Moses, you cannot be saved.”
ento gutamo ni en tye i kin lwak. Guwoto wot me nino acel, 	Thinking he was in their company, they traveled on for a day
Lanyut magi binen ki bot jo ma giye: gibiryemo cen pi lwoŋo nyiŋa, gibiloko ki leb manyen, 	And these signs will accompany those who believe: In my name they will drive out demons; they will speak in new tongues;
Dok odwogo onoŋo gunino woko, pien onoŋo nino doŋ omako waŋgi twatwal. 	When he came back, he again found them sleeping, because their eyes were heavy.
tee tokke opong ki cilo keken 	the back of his neck is full of dirt 
Atito atyer bot Lujudaya ki bot jo Grik bene ni myero guŋut i kom balgi, gudwog cen bot Lubaŋa, ci guye Rwotwa Yecu Kricito. 	I have declared to both Jews and Greeks that they must turn to God in repentance and have faith in our Lord Jesus.
tugo man dong odonggo ni wau mabor wa mallo kwica dok dit bene 	this palm tree has already grown very tall and big
ceng oryeny ni ryany 	the sun shone brightly and hot, some use ryang instead of ryany the former is more used
dano ka dong ocakko matto arege ci dong mokko iye matwal 	when a man has started drinking the local gin, he will be addicted to it forever 
Wuket tek me gwoko ribbe ma Cwiny Maleŋ omiyowu wek wubed acel i twec me kuc.	Be completely humble and gentle; be patient, bearing with one another in love.
gitye i pee me dyangi 	they are pulling the cattle
kotte obinno abwob abowb pe atir ki i kunyango	the rain came by the side not directly from the east
dong agulune abuny	the mouth of the pot is straight not inverted
kella akwaani kic anyam	bring for me some honeycombs to chew
ŋat ma dotowu en Moses, ma wun wugeno. 	“But do not think I will accuse you before the Father
Ocito anyim manok, ci oguŋo oryebbe piny olego ni, “Ka ce twerre, lakit cawa-ni doŋ oa woko i koma.” 	Going a little farther, he fell to the ground and prayed that if possible the hour might pass from him.
Yecu owinyo lok man ma dano-nu oloko, ci ouro twatwal. Owaco bot lwak ma gulube-ni ni, “Ada awaco botwu ni, peya anoŋo niye ma rom ki man, kadi i Icrael. 	But just say the word, and my servant will be healed.
dano ma wangge lit en aye ature peg twatwal i wangge 	the man with diseased eyes is the one whose eyes are full of the whitish discharge
gerro ot rucu rucu	to build the house hurriedly 
Ento gitum magi bedo ka poyo wi dano i balgi mwaka ki mwaka. 	But those sacrifices are an annual reminder of sins.
ryebbo wii agulo dek 	to cover i covering the top of the cooking pot
“Wun jo ma ŋutwu tek, jo ma pe wulirre i cwinywu, ma itwu bene odiŋ, wun wulwenyo ki Cwiny Maleŋ jwijwi	“You stiff-necked people! Your hearts and ears are still uncircumcised
Yam waneno ka en olimo woro ki deyo ki bot Lubaŋa Won, i kare ma dwan oa ki bot Won Deyo Madit, obino botwa kun waco ni, “Man aye Woda ma amaro, ma cwinya yom i kome.” 	He received honor and glory from God the Father when the voice came to him from the Majestic Glory, saying, “This is my Son, whom I love; with him I am well pleased.”
Ka man otum, Yecu ocito loka nam Galilaya, ma en nam me Tiberia. 	And you also must testify, for you have been with me from the beginning.
ngoo ma itye ka yenynyone?	what are you looking for? 
kor lee ocitto ni rot kwica 	the track trampled by the animal has passed through here and gone forward
papai ka giwekko kama lyet ci lic woko 	when pawpaw is left in a warm place it goes bad and becomes watery
Wan doŋ bene waneno, dok wamiyo caden ni, Lubaŋa Won ocwalo Wode me bedo Lalar me lobo. 	And we have seen and testify that the Father has sent his Son to be the Savior of the world.
cittu wucikel rido yen me mokko mac 	go and get twigs of trees for lighting the fire
Meno en gin mumiyo atye ka ciro arem kare ducu, pi jo ma giyero, wek gin bene gunoŋ larre ma tye i Kricito Yecu, kacel ki deyo ma pe gik. 	Reflect on what I am saying, for the Lord will give you insight into all this.
litino gitye ka bammo atabu meegi do me tukkongi 	the children are trying or pretending to make these earthen bowls for their plays 
Myero giyer ki i kin jo man ma gubedo kwedwa i kare ducu ma Rwot Yecu obedo ka wirre i kinwa, 	Therefore it is necessary to choose one of the men who have been with us the whole time the Lord Jesus was living among us,
litino gitye ka tukko tuko  	the children are playing
ocubbo lee ci tong okatto ni pil 	he speared the animal and the spear passed through the body
Ci gucako ket woko ma kingi opokke woko kumeno ka doŋ Paulo oloko lok acel ni, “Cwiny Maleŋ yam oloko kakare bot kwarowu ki i dog lanebi Icaya ni, 	They disagreed among themselves and began to leave after Paul had made this final statement: “The Holy Spirit spoke the truth to your ancestors when he said through Isaiah the prophet:
nyayo lok pe ber 	spreading the matter is not good
Tic ma gitiyo pi Rwot bene tye ma kitgi patpat, ento Rwot tye acel. 	There are different kinds of service, but the same Lord.
Lacen lupwonnye guniaŋ ni Yecu oloko botgi lok i kom Jon Labatija. 	Jesus replied, “To be sure, Elijah comes and will restore all things.
werro ot ki rangi	to plaster the house with colour
winyo otuk woko ni piir 	the bird flew off
teer nyim imoo ii odwel i ceng woko kwica 	take the simsim and put it in the hide for it to dry outside there
Ka abolo lok i koma kena, lok ma abolo pe bedo me ada. 	and come out—those who have done what is good will rise to live, and those who have done what is evil will rise to be condemned.
coo mitto anyira ma bocco ma igi onat 	the men like tall girls with flat slim 
tye ka wot dok tung poto ceng 	travelling going towards the sunset, that is, West
litino dong gutyekko yubbe me peny 	the children have prepared themselves already for the examinations
kweyo ocorre ni mim ma kot okello 	the sand wich the rain brought came in large mass  
Acan lakee mada mitto mere ringo keken 	Acan has excessive desire for meat and wants only meat
gucitto ka bogge me twoo aniino pien twoo aniino kwotto agul gal ma i tee ywat ki i gut 	they went to be examined for sleeping sickness, because sleeping sickness causes swellings of the glands in axilla and the neck
Pien pe ŋat ma pakke kekene en aye ma Lubaŋa pwoyo, ento dano ma Rwot dworo.	But, “Let the one who boasts boast in the Lord.”
“Yam giwaco ni, ‘Dano mo ma ryemo dakone, myero omiye waraga me keto nyom.’ 	“It has been said, ‘Anyone who divorces his wife must give her a certificate of divorce.’
luur gin marac mada ma mon pe gimitto 	sterility is something that is very bad which is not wanted by women 
tim gin ma itye ka timmo ne ni ka dong wacitti 	do what you are doing now and then we go 
Kit meno jo ma giorogi gucito, ci gunoŋo kit macalo Yecu otito botgi-ni. 	Those who were sent ahead went and found it just as he had told them.
oringgo wa Gulu  	he ran as far as Gulu
dok bene watyeko kwero tic me bwolo woko ki nyobo lok pa Lubaŋa, ento pi loko lok ada ka maleŋ wageno ni ŋec ma tye i cwiny dano acel acel ma nyutte balle bipwoyowa. 	Rather, we have renounced secret and shameful ways; we do not use deception, nor do we distort the word of God
mucumar gitiyo kwedde me tic mapol me guuro jami 	nail is used for many kinds of works for nailing things
put muranga dong gugullo 	the beans have sprouted his  
jukko nyim 	taking up simsim with a hand
Onoŋo amoko tamma pe me ŋeyo gin mo i kinwu, kono Yecu Kricito keken, kit ma gigure kwede i kom yatariya. 	For I resolved to know nothing while I was with you except Jesus Christ and him crucified.
jabu gitimmo me agit, gin magirukko i it, ki jami mukene macallo kikopo, caan, malaga ki mkiila 	gold is made into rings, earrings and other valuable things such as jewellery, cups, plates, spoons and medals
motte ki luremmi 	greeting each other with your friends 
pok cam 	distribute the food
rid tyenni matek i waar ci donyo 	push hard your foot into the shoe and it will enter 
Dok koni aŋeyo ni gin ducu ma ibilego ki bot Lubaŋa, Lubaŋa bimiyi.” 	“Lord,” Martha said to Jesus, “if you had been here, my brother would not have died.
put layata woko	uproot the potatoes 
ribbo lacoo ki dako i kanica	to join a man and a woman in the church
gitye ka gecce 	they are back biting him
latinni tye ka cucce pi kit ma gitye ka cammone i ot. 	the child is hanging around for the honey which is being eaten in the house
ot twerro gedde kany 	the house can be built here
ngok twoo marac ma tyekko kero dano woko oyot oyot 	vomiting is a very serious illness which wears a person quickly
Ŋat ma cuŋ i ŋet nyako aye lanyom	You yourselves can testify that I said, ‘I am not the Messiah but am sent ahead of him.’
gem wii nyimme mogo woko 	take a sizable amount from the simsim
twakko litino matye ka balo pii 	to scold the children who are spoiling water 
agulu pil ne tonno pii 	the waterpot drips water 
I kare ma doŋ waneno ni pe waromo ciro wacel, wamito ni wadoŋ woko cen kenwa i Atene, 	So when we could stand it no longer, we thought it best to be left by ourselves in Athens.
guc odoone kany 	throw the stick here
lacoo ma taarro dakone 	a man who despises his wife and does not care about her
ocitto ka cunna	he went to court
nyaa pa Orac dong odoko lacoco 	Orac's daughter has now become a prostitute 
gimiine ringo ma opong ki cogo keken 	he was given a piece of meat which is full of bones only 
lapwopwo gibeddi puru puru i kom ature 	the butterflies are flying all around the flowers
Itye ki gum, in ŋat ma oye, pien lok ma Rwot otito boti bicobbe kakare.” 	Blessed is she who has believed that the Lord would fulfill his promises to her!”
litino gucokke ka cikko won gi ni owot maber 	the children gathered to bid farewell to their father
en mitto cammo olel 	he wants to eat simsim sauce
ot opotto piny ni rum 	the house fell down quite completely destroyed 
moor pa labwor kello lworo 	the roar of a lion brings fear
Pe dok tye kalo akala mo me waco ni, lalam gum dit kato ŋat ma en olamo gum i kome. 	And without doubt the lesser is blessed by the greater.
wek ludito guyekke gudok tung caa 	let the elders separate and move to the other side 
Wun wuŋolo kop i kit pa dano, ento an pe aŋolo kop i kom ŋat mo. 	The Pharisees challenged him, “Here you are, appearing as your own witness; your testimony is not valid.”
pele pa latin meno owekko opotto oturo tyene	the restlessness of the child made him fall and broke her leg 
Ci guloko lok pa Rwot bote ki bot jo ducu ma i ode. 	Then they spoke the word of the Lord to him and to all the others in his house.
puk con, odiko con, miyo imatto yamo magic mamit me odiko 	to rising very early in the morning is very good, it makes you breathe in the fresh, cold, nice air of the morning
dok gibeddo bene attena ento kombeddi dong ka inenno kit ma gupokke kwedde kiea makki woko i komgi 	those people in the past used to walk and live intimately together but now if you see how they have separated, you feel great pity on them 
Pi meno, koŋ waweku lok mukwoŋo i kom Kricito, ento wamedde anyim ki pwony pa jo muteggi, kun pe dok wanwoyo keto te gutine, ma en aye ŋut i kom tic ducu ma yam kwo pe iye, ki moko niyewa i kom Lubaŋa, 	Therefore let us move beyond the elementary teachings about Christ and be taken forward to maturity, not laying again the foundation of repentance from acts that lead to death, and of faith in God,
itte lit 	he has earache
Dok Lubaŋa twero miyo botwu jami mabeco mapol ata, wek kare ducu wubed ki jami ma romowu maber, ma weko wun bene wutwero miyo kony mabup pi kony tic ducu mabeco, 	Each of you should give what you have decided in your heart to give, not reluctantly or under compulsion, for God loves a cheerful giver.
tin guluurre mada i rette nio ka guol 	today they battered themselves thoroughly by throwing down each other many times until they were totally exhausted
Yecu owaccigi ni, “Adada awacciwu ni, ka pe wucamo kom Wod pa dano, wumato remone, pe wutye ki kwo i iwu. 	Then the Jews began to argue sharply among themselves, “How can this man give us his flesh to eat?”
ket rwom wek olor iye 	place the ladder for him to come or descend down I place the ladder so that he may come or descend
twoone tokko kom dano atokka 	the disease causes ulceration of the body 
ladit dong ocitto ki nyem nyem i wii kot 	the old man walked away slowly during the rain 
obeddo moko-moko 	it is like powder
pali mabor 	a pair of long trousers, 
Owot okatto woko li pit 	Owot disappeared unnoticed from here, or Owot went out unnoticed from here
otenggo gwiny latin pi rac wic 	he caned the child for being disobedient
gwok lok paco 	look after the affairs of the family according to the traditional law 
cuk cwiny lawotti kace tyye i pekko wek cwinynye abed matek 	counsel your friend if she has a big problem so that she may be strong and overcome it
ni, ‘An Lubaŋa pa kwarowu, Lubaŋa pa Abraim, ki pa Icaka, ki pa Yakobo.’ Ci kom Moses omyel, lworo ogeŋe nenone. 	‘I am the God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob.’ Moses trembled with fear and did not dare to look.
Luwote ki jo ma yam ginene kun kwayo lim guwaco ni, “Man pe laco ma bedo kun kwayo lim-mi?” 	After saying this, he spit on the ground, made some mud with the saliva, and put it on the man’s eyes.
tye ka catto pul i cuk  	I am only selling groundnuts
latwoo bene dong wotto maber  	the patient also now walks well
Maliam Lamagdala ki Maliam mukene-ni bene onoŋo gitye kunnu gubedo piny gukemme ki lyel. 	He rolled a big stone in front of the entrance to the tomb and went away.
lawotte ma obeddo namba aryo olimmo cilba 	his competitor who came second got a silver medal 
moo tye ka mkido i komme 	the oil is oozing from his body 
rwacco gwok matek twatwal i Dom pe ber 	flinging the dog down violently is not good 
gwangge pa tee lebbe omiyyo pe lokko atir maber 	his incoherent speaking make him not to speak straight and well he speaks incoherently and with bad pronunciation
Myero ginenwa macalo lutic pa Kricito, ki lugwok muŋ pa Lubaŋa. 	This, then, is how you ought to regard us: as servants of Christ and as those entrusted with the mysteries God has revealed.
Ento cwiny jo mogo ocwer, ci gucako lok kekengi ni, “Piŋo moo man gibalo abala? 	Some of those present were saying indignantly to one another, “Why this waste of perfume?
Moo man ma dako-ni oonyo i koma-ni en otimo man pi yubo koma me ayika. 	When she poured this perfume on my body, she did it to prepare me for burial.
nyako ma caar beddo mere ni wenye nyo liwenye 	a loose girl sits with her legs opening wide or sprawling out without care or sits indecently ungracefully
coo nyig litino ducu ma gubinno lacen 	write all the names of the children who came late 
Doŋ pi mitine meno, omiyo gilonyowa wadoko leŋ pi Yecu Kricito mumiyo kome ma ka gitum kicel keken ma otyeko lok woko ducu. 	And by that will, we have been made holy through the sacrifice of the body of Jesus Christ once for all.
roc lokke woko wek pe giteer i kot 	spoil the statement so that it will not be taken to court
Tukiko, ominwa ma gimaro dok en latic pa Rwot me agena, bitittiwu lok ma dok i koma ki i kom ticca. 	Pray also for me, that whenever I speak, words may be given me so that I will fearlessly make known the mystery of the gospel,
cwinynye tye ka ngabbe agabba kace ekatto penynye 	he is worrying whether he has passed his examination
Owaco bot lupwonnyene ni, “Kare bibino ma wubiparo pi neno nino acel mo pa Wod pa dano, ento pe wubineno. 	Then he said to his disciples, “The time is coming when you will long to see one of the days of the Son of Man, but you will not see it.
Deyo obed bot Lubaŋa ma twero tiyo tic madwoŋ twatwal ma kato gin ma watwero lego pire nyo keto i tamwa, pi tekone ma tye ka tic i komwa. 	and to know this love that surpasses knowledge—that you may be filled to the measure of all the fullness of God.
odii pul bene mit mada me abagga ki layata, labolo nyo mugati 	the groundnut paste also is very good to eat with potatoes, bananas, or bread
Ka guneno lakalatwe meno, cwinygi obedo yom adada. 	When they saw the star, they were overjoyed.
ryee acikari i tyeng atir 	line up the police in a straight line 
won paco  	headman of a village
onyubbo warre ki daba 	he smeared his shoes with mud
wik tyen meja ki pinynye wek onen maber 	cut round the lower parts of the legs of a table, to make them look nice
kel cupa me pikko yat 	bring a bottle for putting medicine into 
Pi lok man, alego Lubaŋa piwu, an Paulo ma abedo lamabuc pi Kricito piwu wun Lurok. 	which is his body, the fullness of him who fills everything in every way.
gin ducu bene yam gibatijagi i i pol ki i nam, wek doŋ gubed jo pa Moses. 	They were all baptized into Moses in the cloud and in the sea.
man en aye nyig ma yang gilwonggo kwedde litino me mwaka meno nikatto awobe 	this is the word that is used for the names of chidren of those ages instead of awobe 
litino gimaarro cammo pwomo mada	children love very much to eat passion fruits
muno ma okwoggo donynyo Gulu oketto tayane i tee got Ajulu	the first European to enter Gulu camped at the foot of mountain Ajulu
Lubaga oywee i ceng me abiro ma dong otyeko ticce me ketto piny	God rested on the seventh day after finishing his creation
putto gwana	to uproot the cassava
Kono yam gikwano Abraim ni kite atir pi tic ma en otiyo, kono en tye ki gin mo ma en otiyo, kono en tye ki gin mo ma en nyatte pire, ento pe i nyim Lubaŋa. 	What then shall we say that Abraham, our forefather according to the flesh, discovered in this matter?
Ka doŋ oa ki kunnu, ci lupwonycik ki Luparicayo gucako dine matek ma girobo doge ki peny mapol, 54kun gikiye wek gimak lok ma a ki i doge.	waiting to catch him in something he might say.
dano ma jugge atata ballo tic woko ki jo mukene  	a person who always moves about doing nothing delays work for the others
Cwiny Maleŋ tye macalo cadenne, pien Cwiny aye ada. 	For there are three that testify:
ginno kwon maber	to shape the kwon very well into balls
omiyo cukari ka wang gweno ma nene oterro 	he gave some sugar in exchange for the chicken which he took
yuu yugine odok tung kupiny 	throw the rubbish towards the west 
Ento macalo yam Lubaŋa oloko i dog lunebine ducu ni Kricito mere myero onen can, ci doŋ omiyo ocobbe kakare kumeno. 	But this is how God fulfilled what he had foretold through all the prophets, saying that his Messiah would suffer.
Wucuŋ matek i nyime pi niye kun waŋeyo ni, utmegiwu ma gitye i lobo ducu gitye ka ciro kit can macalo meno. 	Cast all your anxiety on him because he cares for you.
Ento latic lawote-ni oryebbe piny kun bako doge bote ni, ‘Koŋ idi cwinyi i koma, abiculo banyani.’ 	“His fellow servant fell to his knees and begged him, ‘Be patient with me, and I will pay it back.’
Paulo odonyo i kacokke kun loko ki tekcwiny laboŋo lworo pi dwe adek, kun laro lok ki bolo lok i kom ker pa Lubaŋa. 	Paul entered the synagogue and spoke boldly there for three months, arguing persuasively about the kingdom of God.
awula coo rukko i badgi ka gicitto ka myello myel bwola 	men wear the awula when going to the bwola dance
Yecu ogamo ni, “Wuye Lubaŋa. 	“Have faith in God,” Jesus answered.
I adane wan watye ma wacur acura i kema man, kun wamito matek ni girukwa ki kabedowa ma a i polo, 	For we know that if the earthly tent we live in is destroyed, we have a building from God, an eternal house in heaven, not built by human hands.
ka gua ki i wi lyel gudok, gutito lok man ducu bot jo apar wiye acel ca, ki bot jo mukene ducu. 	Then they remembered his words.
wugwokke mada ka wulokko lok ki laccono pien en laroro mada 	be careful when talking with the man because he is a double dealer or a scandalous person who can undermine someone, or falsely accuses somebody
bipwode, bikete i kin jo ma pe genne. 	He will cut him to pieces and assign him a place with the unbelievers.
en aye gin ma gimakko kwedde ki rec  	it is a hook for catching the fish
An auro kit ma wulokke kwede oyot, kun wubwoto ŋat ma ceŋ olwoŋowu i kica pa Kricito, dok wulokke woko wutye ka lubo lok me kwena maber mo mukene. 	who gave himself for our sins to rescue us from the present evil age, according to the will of our God and Father,
owacca ni en diki ebibino 	he told me that he will be coming tomorrow 
kun doŋ en odoko ladit mada makato lumalaika ducu, ma rom aroma ki kit ma nyiŋ ma gimiye ber matek makato megi woko. 	So he became as much superior to the angels as the name he has inherited is superior to theirs.
komme yot 	he is healthy 
wit geya, kal, ruc etc. 	the ears of sorghum, millet, rice etc 
rec man ma gitallo otwoo dong opong ki Iwiny madowong mada 	this dried smoked fish is full of dead beetles larvae
En bigwokowu miyo wucuŋ matek nio wa i agikki, noŋo pe wutye ki gin mo ma myero gidotwu iye i nino pa Rwotwa Yecu Kricito. 	He will also keep you firm to the end, so that you will be blameless on the day of our Lord Jesus Christ.
ngallo kwon en aye pe hyena wacel  	eating kwon without the sauce is not possible
yer wiye twerro bimme maber mada 	his hair can be flattened very well
wek jo mudoŋŋe guyeny Rwot, kacel ki Lurok ducu ma gilwoŋogi ki nyiŋa. 	that the rest of mankind may seek the Lord, even all the Gentiles who bear my name, says the Lord, who does these things’—
in inyap pi tiyo ki lok atata ma iwinynyo 	you are weak for doing something with the useless words that you have heard
Ci Yecu oa ki kunnu, ocito wa i lobo ma tye cok ki Turo ki Cidon. 	For out of the heart come evil thoughts—murder, adultery, sexual immorality, theft, false testimony, slander.
Ka guwinyo lok man, lwak ducu wa lujog-mucoro guye ni Lubaŋa oporre, pien yam gibatijagi ki batija pa Jon, 	(All the people, even the tax collectors, when they heard Jesus’ words, acknowledged that God’s way was right, because they had been baptized by John.
yer tik myero gilyello teretere 	the beard should be shaved frequently 
wang bao ma giribbo ka oribbe marac ci ngwec woko telokke ni pokke woko 	the joint of the wood plank if it was badly joined it comes off spontaneously
Ka ce wutye ki lok mogo me kwo ma watye iye-ni, piŋo wutero i nyim jo ma pigi pe tek bot jo muye Kricito? 	Therefore, if you have disputes about such matters, do you ask for a ruling from those whose way of life is scorned in the church?
ka ŋatti mo odonyo ki bota, en bibwot, bidonyo, bikatti woko, binoŋo cam. 	I am the gate; whoever enters through me will be saved
Petero ocako lok ci owacci, “Adada aniaŋ atir ni Lubaŋa pe poko kin dano, 	Then Peter began to speak: “I now realize how true it is that God does not show favoritism
“Rwot, doŋ guneko lunebini woko, gumuko keno tyerri-gu woko ducu, an kena aye doŋ adoŋ, dok bene gimito neka woko.” 	I ask then: Did God reject his people? By no means! I am an Israelite myself, a descendant of Abraham, from the tribe of Benjamin.
Pe myero ati ki jamina kit macalo iya mito? Gwok nyo cwinyi oballe woko pi gin maber ma atiyo-ni ba?’ 	Don’t I have the right to do what I want with my own money? Or are you envious because I am generous?’
Ka Maliam oo ka ma Yecu tye iye, ka onene, ci opoto piny ka tyene, owacce ni, “Rwot, kono nene itye kany, kono omera pe oto.” 	When the Jews who had been with Mary in the house, comforting her, noticed how quickly she got up and went out, they followed her, supposing she was going to the tomb to mourn there.
cul me mucoro tye Mau alip abic 	payment for tax is five thousand shillings only
Ci gua woko ki i wi lyel oyotoyot ki lworo ki yomcwiny madwoŋ, guriŋo gucito ka tito bot lupwonnyene. 	There you will see him.’ Now I have told you.”
yito ma aa i oceke me motoka kello aona , ka ibeddo ka yuyone pi mwaka mapol ci kello twoo kanca i obboni 	the exhaust pipe smoke causes cough but if you continue to inhale it for many years, it can cause cancer of your lungs
Ci lupwonnye gucito ka tito lok i kabedo ducu, kun Rwot kikome bene tye ka tic kwedgi, kun moko lok ma gitito ki lanyutte.]	Then the disciples went out and preached everywhere, and the Lord worked with them and confirmed his word by the signs that accompanied it.
Wutam ni, diyo cwiny pa Rwot aye larrewa ennu. Ominwa Paulo ma wamaro ocoyo botwu bene kit meno, pi ryeko ma gimiye, 	Bear in mind that our Lord’s patience means salvation, just as our dear brother Paul also wrote you with the wisdom that God gave him.
Kit macalo Kricito yam ociro arem me kom, wun bene myero wurukke ki tam acel kit meno, wek gimiwu tek. Pien ŋat mo ma doŋ ociro arem kom, pe doŋ medde ki bal, 	For “you were like sheep going astray,” but now you have returned to the Shepherd and Overseer of your souls.
gicamo cam ma kun noŋo pud gitamo ni, “Man adada gin ma gityero bot jok,” miyo tam ma tye i igi ma nyuto botgi balgi balle woko. 	Some people are still so accustomed to idols that when they eat sacrificial food they think of it as having been sacrificed to a god, and since their conscience is weak, it is defiled.
yoo man twerro gengge ki motoka wok kany ka gibollo iye kkii ki yen madonggo 	the cars can be stopped from passing here if large stones and logs of wood are dropped on the road
uno yogge woko ki igut dyel ka pe ononggo gitweyo matek 	the rope becomes loose from the goat's neck if it is not tight 
Ladit ma loyo askari kacel ki jo ma onoŋo gitye kwede, ma gubedo ka kiyo Yecu, ka guneno kit ma piny oyeŋŋe kwede ki gin ma doŋ otyeko timme, gubedo ki lworo madit mada, ci guwacci, “Adada, man onoŋo Wod pa Lubaŋa!” 	They came out of the tombs after Jesus’ resurrection and went into the holy city and appeared to many people.
opego Iwokke i daba 	the pigs take a bath in the mud 
jenynye me lweny 	being furious and wanting to fight 
Lokke doŋ tye niŋniŋ, utmegina? Ka wucokke kacel, dano acel acel noŋo tye ki gin mo	What then shall we say, brothers and sisters? When you come together, each of you has a hymn, or a word of instruction, a revelation, a tongue or an interpretation
pien an atye kwedi, pe tye ŋat mo ma bitubbe i komi ki timi marac, pien atye ki lwak jo mapol i gaŋ man.” 	For I am with you, and no one is going to attack and harm you, because I have many people in this city.”
dano ducu ma gubinno agec me dakika apar myerro pe gudony 	all the people who came later after ten minutes must not enter
ngwec yatte lemmo cwiny dano 	the smell of the medicine makes people feel sick or like vomiting
I kare ma Latin romo oyabo ka ma gimwono me abiro, polo oliŋ woko litik pi kare ma romo nucu cawa kulu. 	When he opened the seventh seal, there was silence in heaven for about half an hour.
wer aryo oneko oboni	two wooden-bowls of food killed Oboni
Onoŋo bedo niŋniŋ ka Lubaŋa odiyo cwinye pi kare malac i kom atabo mogo me akemone ma doŋ guromo me aneka woko, pi mito nyuto akemone ki me miyo tekone oŋene? 	Does not the potter have the right to make out of the same lump of clay some pottery for special purposes and some for common use?
Gin gucako oro Luparicayo ki jo pa Kerode bene, wek gumak lok ma a i doge. 	Later they sent some of the Pharisees and Herodians to Jesus to catch him in his words.
Wan jo ma waye aye wabidonyo i yweyo meno ma yam en oloko pire ni, “Macalo yam akwoŋo ki kiniga, ‘Gin pe bidonyo i yweyo bota,’” kadi bed ticce onoŋo yam otum woko cakke i acakki piny. 	Now we who have believed enter that rest, just as God has said, “So I declared on oath in my anger, ‘They shall never enter my rest.’” And yet his works have been finished since the creation of the world.
man ngom meera 	this is my land
pe ber in me rutto lok i kom lawotti 	it is not good for you to instigate a case against your companion
man en aye akwota kwota ma binno ka gin mo okaayi macallo kic nyo pino, kaddi ikom joo mukene kac pa obeer bene 	this is the swelling which comes after insect bites, like bees, wasp and even mosquitoes in some people
cwal lwak gucit i kin paco macokcok, guwil cam pigi kengi.” 	As evening approached, the disciples came to him and said, “This is a remote place, and it’s already getting late
Ka kono tyen wacci, “Pien an pe a ciŋ, an pe a dul kom,” meno pe geŋe bedo dul kom. 	Now if the foot should say, “Because I am not a hand, I do not belong to the body,” it would not for that reason stop being part of the body.
joo Karamoja gimatto remo dyang 	the Karamojong drink cow blood 
bki murangane i pii let dong iteddi 	soak the beans in water and then cook them 
Koŋ wunen kit ma en dit kwede! Abraim, ma en aye kwarowa, yam omiyo bote dul acel me apar me jami ma en oyako. 	Just think how great he was: Even the patriarch Abraham gave him a tenth of the plunder!
piny tye ka meny mada, kot koni cweer  	there is a lot of flushing in the sky, it is likely to rain soon
Yecu ogamo doge ni, “Ka ce imito bedo maber laboŋo roc mo i komi, cit icat jami ducu ma itye kwede, ci imi limme ki lucan, ci ibibedo ki lwak lonyo ma gikano piri i polo	Jesus answered, “If you want to be perfect, go, sell your possessions and give to the poor, and you will have treasure in heaven
tag pii i agulu, cupuria, ki gin mo ma wiye twolo ma pii tye iye 	shake water in pot, sauce-pan, and any open container, to move to and fro
pii potto oduru tworo ka agulone pe gilwokko jwi jwi 	the water becomes filled with concentrated algae if the pot is not frequently washed
odonyo iye kacel ki lupwonnyene. 	When he had finished praying, Jesus left with his disciples and crossed the Kidron Valley
jul gweno wek gunyaa 	look after the chicken carefully, so that they may multiply
joo Pawel, jii Atiak 	the people of Pawel, the people of Atiak 
ojwee labwor okatto kany 	the foot marks of a lion, it has passed along here 
lalur laworo omakko dyel wail okero 	hyena caught the goat from inside the special hut built for goats 
Cwiny Maleŋ onoŋo otyeko nyuto bote ni, en pe bito ma peya oneno Kricito pa Rwot. 	It had been revealed to him by the Holy Spirit that he would not die before he had seen the Lord’s Messiah.
poto anyogi ma pud gipurro a pura 	a maize field that has just been cultivated
Tye kit meno ŋat ma kano lonyo pire kene, kun pe tye ki lonyo bot Lubaŋa.” 	“This is how it will be with whoever stores up things for themselves but is not rich toward God.”
Yecu odokke iye ni, “Nakanen pe awacci ni, ka iye, ci ibineno deyo pa Lubaŋa?” 	It was a cave with a stone laid across the entrance.
Pien tim maraco ma dano ma kite atir-ru obedo ka nenone ki ka winyone nino ki nino, i kare ma en obedo botgi, omiye waŋcwiny madwoŋ twatwal. 	(for that righteous man, living among them day after day, was tormented in his righteous soul by the lawless deeds he saw and heard)—
litino gucitto ka putto obwollaguti ki i poto 	let us go to see the clown
“Deyo obed bot Lubaŋa malo i wi polo kuc obed i kin jo ma en pwoyo!” 	“Glory to God in the highest heaven, and on earth peace to those on whom his favor rests.”
labwor ka oyenynyo lee kwee ci mwoddo yango 	when the lion fails to find an animal, it eats the sausage tree fruits
wii yatte woko wek ocak jany ki piny 	cut the top of the tree so that it may start producing the branches that will spread out
Ka kare meno otum, wayubbe ci wacito i Jerucalem. 	After this, we started on our way up to Jerusalem.
Ka ŋat acel ma gubedo kwede i dog cam owinyo lok man, owaco ni, “Tye ki gum dano ma bicamo kwon i ker pa Lubaŋa!” 	When one of those at the table with him heard this, he said to Jesus, “Blessed is the one who will eat at the feast in the kingdom of God.”
latin ononggo dong tye ka myeno woko ma pud peya onenno minne 	the child was already about to cry before seeing her mother 
Pi meno, omiyo amito ni mon matino ma coggi oto ginyomgi wek gunywal litino, gulo odigi, wek pe gumi kare ki lukworwa me loko gin mo marac i komwa. 	And not only do they become idlers, but also busybodies who talk nonsense, saying things they ought not to.
Ento waŋgi oumme woko, pe guŋeye. 	As they talked and discussed these things with each other, Jesus himself came up and walked along with them;
Adada awacci ni, wan waloko i kom gin ma waŋeyo, wabedo caden i kom gin ma waneno, ento wun pe wuye lok ma watito botwu. 	“You are Israel’s teacher,” said Jesus, “and do you not understand these things?
kono pe rutte kono ocello woko ki kidi 	if he did not duck, he would have been hit a stone
Ka guo bote, ci owaco botgi ni, “Wun kikomwu wuŋeyo kit ma yam abedo kwede i kinwu wun ducu, nia i kare ma tyena okwoŋo nyono lobo Acia, 	When they arrived, he said to them: “You know how I lived the whole time I was with you, from the first day I came into the province of Asia.
Pien miŋo pa Lubaŋa kato ryeko pa dano woko ki ryeko, goro pa Lubaŋa bene tek kato teko ma dano tye kwede woko. 	For the foolishness of God is wiser than human wisdom, and the weakness of God is stronger than human strength.
dano ma lapoti piir nino ducu potto I pekko pien noggo pe lleyo gin ma etiyo 	an imitator always gets into trouble because he does not know what to do
Yecu odok iye ni, “Wun yalwak me kare man, pe wutye ki niye, kitwu doŋ oballe woko. Abibedo kwedwu wa awene? Abidiyo cwinya i kwomwu nio wa awene? Kel wodi kany.” 	“You unbelieving and perverse generation,” Jesus replied, “how long shall I stay with you and put up with you? Bring your son here.”
dano ma leny makko kitmeno, ka omatto gin ma wac, ci barro korre.mada, nonggo tye ki twoo me ic 	a person like that who gets heartburn, whenever he takes any sour thing, has got either stomach or duodenal ulcer
“Wun wukado me lobo	“You are the salt of the earth
mon mapol me ninno man pe gimitto dot 	the present women do not like suckling 
nyayo lok pe ber 	making the matter worse is not good
Kumeno ka gucamo otum, otiŋo kikopo kun wacci, “Kikopo man aye gicikke manyen i remona. Wutim kuman i kare ducu ma wumato, me po pira.” 	In the same way, after supper he took the cup, saying, “This cup is the new covenant in my blood; do this, whenever you drink it, in remembrance of me.”
Mito wubed kun wuciro, wek omi wuti gin ma Lubaŋa mito, ci doŋ wunoŋo gin ma yam en ociko pire. 	You need to persevere so that when you have done the will of God, you will receive what he has promised.
rok pa joo mataar ki joo macol 	the white and black races
nyaarro lum ki nyarro nyim  	cutting the grass and harvesting the simsim 
Kit ma meno bene yam gicoyo lok i kom Abraim ni, “En oye Lubaŋa, omiyo gikwane ni en dano ma kite atir.” 	So again I ask, does God give you his Spirit and work miracles among you by the works of the law, or by your believing what you heard?
nyee mene ma odonggi? 	who boxed you? 
latin gwinynyo dudde twatwal myero obed ki olwinyo 	this child scratches too much his bottom, he must have thread worms
Gin yam gumito ni giŋe aŋa, nyo kit kare mene, ma Cwiny pa Kricito ma tye i igi tye ka nyuto, i kare ma otito iye pi can ma Kricito biciro, ki pi deyo ma dok bilubo. 	Concerning this salvation, the prophets, who spoke of the grace that was to come to you, searched intently and with the greatest care,
wacitto ka gobbo nngom 	we went to till or to cultivate or to dig
ranynyo lok pe ber ki mon 	speaking scornfully is not good for women
dano acel acel myerro ogee coc pien en aye yoo acel bene me lokko ki lawotti matye kama bor 	every person must know how to write because it is one of the ways of communication with your friend who is far away
kulu pong ki jange	a river is filled up by its tributaries
Abedo ki yomcwiny mada i kare ma utmego mogo gubino kany, ma gumiyo caden ma mako kit me ada, kit macalo in giri ilubo lok ada. 	Dear friend, I pray that you may enjoy good health and that all may go well with you, even as your soul is getting along well.
latinne dong Lye ka jwik ajwikka 	the child is getting stunted
tuur pa tyen latin man obeddo rac mada 	the breaking ot this child's leg was very bad 
pe icit imwam lok paco kuno pi gin ma otimme kany, pien in lamwam lok 	do not go and let out the secret of what has happened here, because you are a person who does not keep secrets
lwob dyel i lum kama cammo iye 	tie the goat in the grass where it can eat 
lutowa? waŋgi oyabbe guneno piny, luŋolo guwoto, ludobo gilonyogi, ki ludiit guwinyo lok, ki jo muto gicerogi woko, ki lucan bene gitito botgi lok me kwena maber.	The blind receive sight, the lame walk, those who have leprosy are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead are raised, and the good news is proclaimed to the poor.
ci odonyo i ot pa Jekaria, omoto Elicabet. 	where she entered Zechariah’s home and greeted Elizabeth.
Ka en owinyo, ci oa oyotoyot, ocito bote. 	Martha answered, “I know he will rise again in the resurrection at the last day.”
tye akura mapol mada ma mon tiyo kwedgi, inogo ma giwirro awirra ki mogo ma gikutto akutta i komgi	there are many varieties of perfumes which the women use: some for smearing and other for spraying on the body
awekko en tye ka rutto bongone	I left him sewing his clothes
pi meno, lok ma yam gicoyo waco ni, “Lubaŋa pyem ki jo ma wakke, ento miyo kica bot jo mamwol.” 	That is why Scripture says: “God opposes the proud but shows favor to the humble.”
tii matek wek iii nyigkakani 	work very hard so that you may lift up the name of your clan
lapoya tin oryemmo dano mada ki odoo 	a mad man today chased people with a stick 
Wan pe waumo cwinywa woko botwu, ento wun aye wuumo cwinywu. 	We have spoken freely to you, Corinthians, and opened wide our hearts to you.
ento gineke woko ki jo ma gilube ducu guket woko ata. 	He was killed, all his followers were dispersed, and it all came to nothing.
Ento ka doŋ gityeko tweye ki del, Paulo oloko ki ladit ma loyo dano miya ma ocuŋ ka ŋete ni, “Cik ye ni gipwod dano ma Laroma ma peya giŋolo kop oloye bo?” 	As they stretched him out to flog him, Paul said to the centurion standing there, “Is it legal for you to flog a Roman citizen who hasn’t even been found guilty?”
wumarre kekenwu macalo ceŋ amarowu. 	“A new command I give you: Love one another
cutcut polo oyabbe, ci oneno Cwiny Maleŋ pa Lubaŋa ma bino kun lyanne piny macalo akuri, ci opye i kome. 	As soon as Jesus was baptized, he went up out of the water
latinne pud twerro tirre 	his child's bad behaviour can still be changed
dako pa Okwir goyo adugu mada ma loyo mon mukene ducu	Okwir's wife is an expert in playing adugu she plays better than other women
Pien yam gicoyo ni, Abraim onoŋo tye ki awobe aryo, acel obedo wod pa aŋeca, ki acel obedo wod pa dakone kikome. 	Tell me, you who want to be under the law, are you not aware of what the law says?
ngic me oddi myerro pe obed me tukku tukko, myerro gigii ki kore ki kore	inspection of houses must not be taken 
Yecu dok olwoŋo lwak bote, ci owaco botgi ni, “Wun ducu wuwiny lokka, ci wuniaŋ. 	Again Jesus called the crowd to him and said, “Listen to me, everyone, and understand this.
ngat acel 	one person 
cukku litino ka kwan 	urging the children to read study
Ento ka mwaka aryo okato, Porcio Festo oleyo ka tyen Pelici. Pelici onoŋo mito ni Lujudaya gupwoye, omiyo oweko Paulo i mabuc.	When two years had passed, Felix was succeeded by Porcius Festus, but because Felix wanted to grant a favor to the Jews, he left Paul in prison.
ci guniaŋ ni en dano ma yam lego kony i doggola Maber-ri. Guuro matek ma doggi otwo woko pi gin ma otimme i kome-ni. 	they recognized him as the same man who used to sit begging at the temple gate called Beautiful, and they were filled with wonder and amazement at what had happened to him.
ngatine kitte rac cammo labolo ci bulo potte i ot kany pe i debe yugi 	the one who ate the bananas here has bad manners, instead of throwing the banana skin in the dustbin he throws them in the house
nyim dong otwoo rommo me ategga 	the simsim is dry enough, it is ready now for threshing
Ento Caulo owinyo pi lok ma giyubo. 	but Saul learned of their plan
ger atata en aye nyayo two me jonyo 	promiscuous sexual intercourse is one of the ways for spreading AIDS
otwol kot beddo i ngom, tekki kot ocweer ci otwol kot katti kama leng 	an earthworm lives in the sand earth, when it rains, it comes out 
tuur wangge odin mada 	he has thick eyebrows
Dok bene pe wukwano i cik ni i ceŋ cabit ajwagi ma i ot pa Lubaŋa gipyedo ceŋ cabit, ento gipe ki bal? 	He entered the house of God, and he and his companions ate the consecrated bread—which was not lawful for them to do, but only for the priests.
pukko kado i dek 	putting excessive salt in the sauce 
Magi gin aye jo ma i ŋet yo, ka ma lok gicoyo iye	Some people are like seed along the path, where the word is sown
Pi ryeko pa Lubaŋa omiyo jo me lobo pe guŋeye pi ryekogi, ento Lubaŋa pi twerone olaro jo muye en pi lok me miŋo ma watito. 	For since in the wisdom of God the world through its wisdom did not know him, God was pleased through the foolishness of what was preached to save those who believe.
baar akwota matye i emmeni woko 	open or incise the swelling in his thigh
junne oonyo mada  	his chin is full of pimples
kulune nino ducu jaa mada 	this river from time to time becomes very full and flows with force 
Ento ka owinyo lok man, okumo, pien onoŋo en lalonyo twatwal. 	When he heard this, he became very sad, because he was very wealthy.
piyo lateke teke  	dancing by shaking of waist in a special way
dyang obolo ni tye kwene? 	where is the cow with the white face? 
Iweny ocakke woko i kin Jeremel ki Italiano 	war broke out between Germany and Italy
Oneka ocitto ka nuddo poto aker ne 	Oneka went to recultivate the field which he tilled last week
Yecu ocuŋ i nyim laloc ci laloc openye ni, “In i kabaka pa Lujudaya bo?” Yecu ogamo ni, “Iwaco kakare gire.” 	and they used them to buy the potter’s field, as the Lord commanded me.”
ngati okwallo bongone 	someone has stolen his clothes
cig acel pe kwekko ngwiny 	one hand cannot open the vagina
Yecu ka oloko man, otiŋo waŋe malo i polo, owaco ni, “Abana, kare doŋ oromo	“Very truly I tell you,” Jesus answered, “before Abraham was born, I am!”
Kabaka Agripa, in iye lok pa lunebi? Aŋeyo ni iye lokgi.” 	King Agrippa, do you believe the prophets? I know you do.”
wok ki kwica 	passes over there
en pud butto i goga pien tye ka gerro odde 	the man is still sleeping in the barn because he is still building his house
odonyo ci obedo kacel ki lukur-piny kun kuro wek enen gin ma bitimme. 	He entered and sat down with the guards to see the outcome.
labolo opec kany mape wacce me acamma 	the bananas are in very plentiful here for eating
Gubino bot Jon, guwacce ni, “Lapwony, ŋat ma ceŋ itye kwede loka Jordan, ma ceŋ ibolo lok me caden i kome-ni, nen, en tye ka batija dano, jo ducu gibino bote.” 	An argument developed between some of John’s disciples and a certain Jew over the matter of ceremonial washing.
gum me nekko lee  	luck for killing animals during hunting
ummo kom ki bongo  	covering the body with cloth
catto tam manyen 	today they are fully occupied with roasting groundnuts 
kel kal ma obiir-ri icimoo woko wek otwoo obed me tobi 	bring the germinating millet and put it out to dry for yeast
pe i tuc tyen leela  	don't pierce the bicycle tyre
En Lubaŋa ma omiyowu Cwiny Maleŋ-ŋi, dok otiyo bene taŋo mapol i kinwu, en tiyo man pien ni wulubo cik, kono nyo pi ye lok ma wuwinyo ma gitito botwu? 	Have you experienced so much in vain—if it really was in vain?
yer atyer 	general election for (Parliament) 
Lok man yam gituco oromo lobo Judaya ducu kun ocakke i Galilaya i ŋe kare ma Jon otito lok i kom batija. 	You know what has happened throughout the province of Judea, beginning in Galilee after the baptism that John preached—
nyimmi twerro nyaarre maber mada 	the simsim can be sitety well cut
ginne puddi peya gityo otum 	the thing has not yet been completely made
Ka wabedo kwo pi Cwiny Maleŋ, ci myero doŋ wawotu kun walubo en. 	Those who belong to Christ Jesus have crucified the flesh with its passions and desires.
Latin-nu ogamo ni, ‘Pe abicito’, ento lacen oŋut ci ocito ka tic i poto olok. 	So they answered Jesus, “We don’t know.” Then he said, “Neither will I tell you by what authority I am doing these things.
teer mot meera bene ki laremma 	take my greetings to my friend also
imitto pot karatac adii? 	how many sheets of paper do you want? 
Lok me adot ma gidote kwede-ni giguro malo ka wiye, kun gicoyo ni, “Man aye Yecu kabaka pa Lujudaya.” 	And sitting down, they kept watch over him there.
Ento Yecu owaco botgi ni, “Wuwek litino gubin bota, pe wugeŋgi, pien ker me polo tye pi jo macalo gin.” 	Jesus said, “Let the little children come to me, and do not hinder them, for the kingdom of heaven belongs to such as these.”
In bene myero item gwokke i kom nyer-ru, pien en yam opyem ki lokwa matek mada. 	The Lord will repay him for what he has done.
awillo bongo me ribbeni laworo 	I bought your wedding dress yesterday 
Utmegina, pe wubed ki ur ka lobo kwerowu. 	Do not be surprised, my brothers and sisters, if the world hates you.
Oyotoyot woo owinnye kun oa ki i polo macalo yamo ma kodo mager, opoŋo ot ducu ka ma gubedo iye. 	Suddenly a sound like the blowing of a violent wind came from heaven and filled the whole house where they were sitting.
tol junyo nwang mada pe cot atata 	junyo's rope is very tough and does not break easily
ogaru tin omakko dyel acel woko 	the leopard caught one of the goats today
man en aye ajwaka madit mada i ot yat mewa kany	this one is the most senior doctor in our hospital here
Apolo mono en aŋa? Paulo kono en aŋa? Wan aye lutic ma miyo wuye Yecu. Ŋat acel acel tye ki tic ma Rwot opoko bote. 	What, after all, is Apollos? And what is Paul? Only servants, through whom you came to believe—as the Lord has assigned to each his task.
Yecu owaco ni, “Wudwok jami pa Cecar bot Cecar, ki jami pa Lubaŋa wudwok bot Lubaŋa.” 	He said to them, “Then give back to Caesar what is Caesar’s, and to God what is God’s.”
umme tye torre 	his nose is blocking 
(Nen, abebino macalo lakwo! Dano ma bedo ma waŋe twolo kun kiyo piny tye ki gum, ma kun noŋo gwoko boŋŋine, wek pe ewot munero, ma dano gineno kome ma pe eruko iye boŋo!) 	“Look, I come like a thief! Blessed is the one who stays awake and remains clothed, so as not to go naked and be shamefully exposed.”
Pe wuwek miti me kom obwowu, macalo lurok ma pe ŋeyo Lubaŋa. 	not in passionate lust like the pagans, who do not know God;
Micon Katoli maarro gwokko amam mada 	the Catholic Mission loves very much keeping a large number of pigeons
orwoo pi tye ka nekko latin mada kel pii oyot oyot wek omatti 	the child is very thirsty, bring the water quickly for him to drink
labolo guile maber mada me gweyo dek 	the plantain dents very well for scooping the sauce
ka opiko, ci koŋo vino biyeco kicaa woko, kicaa bene biballe. 	And no one pours new wine into old wineskins
mitto latin nyako meno mada 	likes that girl very much 
latinne pe mullo maber 	the child does not crawl very well 
Pien atamo ni, Lubaŋa onyutowa wan lukwena calo jo mudoŋ cen twatwal, macalo jo ma giŋolo kop me to i wigi	For it seems to me that God has put us apostles on display at the end of the procession, like those condemned to die in the arena
yamo tye ka Bello dero woko 	the wind is tilting the granary or barn
Ka won ot doŋ oa malo ocego doggola, wun wubicuŋ ki woko wudwoŋo doggola kun wuwaco ni, ‘Ladit, yab botwa doggola ba!’ En bidok iye botwu ni, ‘An pe aŋeyo ka ma wua iye.’ 	Once the owner of the house gets up and closes the door, you will stand outside knocking and pleading, ‘Sir, open the door for us.’ “But he will answer, ‘I don’t know you or where you come from.’
dog mon omiyo lee ooneko otwee	words from a woman's mouth caused the animal to kill otwee
Iwiyo ki i ot, ki i kin dano, ki i gang ducu en ngeyo maber 	he knows very well how to escape from the house, from among the people, and from the homes
awobe gubinno kany ma gurukko odyeer keken ka myello myel Bwola 	the boys came here all dressed only in pieces of leather behind their backs to dance Bwola
ter motoka ka meddo moo ne 	take the car to add some petrol into it 
nenne rac ki i wangge 	he hates him
En ocokogi ogurogi kacel ki jo mukene ma gitiyo kit tic acel-lu, ci owaco botgi ni, “Lutuwa, wun wuŋeyo ni lonyowa a i tic man. 	He called them together, along with the workers in related trades, and said: “You know, my friends, that we receive a good income from this business.
I kin cawa apar wiye acel en dok ocito onoŋo jo mukene gucuŋo acuŋa kunnu	About five in the afternoon he went out and found still others standing around
Lwak ducu ma gucokke ka nene, ka guneno gin ma otimme, gudok paco kun gidoŋo korgi. 	When all the people who had gathered to witness this sight saw what took place, they beat their breasts and went away.
twanynyo yito taa 	blowing out tobacco smoke as he smokes
lwong lamiru okel pii ki welo me lwok	call the slave to bring water for the guests for washing
wekko citto	to let him go 
twak litinoni gucit woko ki kenyo 	shout at the children to go away from there
man myerro obed dano me abumma pien pe ngeyo gin mo	this should be a man who can easily be swindled because he does not know anything
Lamalaika me aŋwenne okuto tumme, ci gin mo ogoyo dul acel me adek me ceŋ woko, ki dul acel me adek me dwe, ki dul acel me adek me lakalatwe, mumiyo dulgi me acel me adekke odoko col	The fourth angel sounded his trumpet, and a third of the sun was struck, a third of the moon, and a third of the stars, so that a third of them turned dark
Yecu owacogi ni, “Tye ŋat acel i kinwu wun jo apar wiye aryo-ni, en aye dano ma tye ka gweyo i atabo acel kweda-ni. 	“It is one of the Twelve,” he replied, “one who dips bread into the bowl with me.
Pien aneno cwinyi kec calo keda, bal otweyi woko idoko lamabucce.” 	For I see that you are full of bitterness and captive to sin.”
latinne dong omal woko i tim	the child is now a vagabond, wandering about and lost there, outside the country 
wucuŋ iye matek. 	With the help of Silas, whom I regard as a faithful brother, I have written to you briefly, encouraging you and testifying that this is the true grace of God
macalo en Lubaŋa doŋ owaco ni, “An abibedo i igi, abibedo ka wot awota i kingi, abibedo Lubaŋagi, gin bene gibibedo jona. 	What agreement is there between the temple of God and idols? For we are the temple of the living God
pe oye cen mo oloko, pien onoŋo giŋeye. 	He also drove out many demons, but he would not let the demons speak because they knew who he was.
Lamalaika meno onoŋo nen calo lutkot ma wil, ki ginarukane onoŋo nen matar calo pee. 	After the Sabbath, at dawn on the first day of the week, Mary Magdalene and the other Mary went to look at the tomb.
Adula lakee mitto meerre ringo keken	Adula has excessive desire for meat therefore she likes only meat
awobini dok lagatte mada 	this boy does show off too much
Gibinekogi ki pala lucwan, gibiterogi me bedo opii i kin rok ducu	They will fall by the sword and will be taken as prisoners to all the nations
um komme woko 	cover him up
kun pwonyogi ki lok i kom ker pa Lubaŋa. I kare ma obedo kwedgi, ocikogi ni pe gua ki i Jerucalem, ento gukur gin ma Lubaŋa Won ociko pire, kun wacci, “En gin ma con wuwinyo ki bota-ni. 	On one occasion, while he was eating with them, he gave them this command: “Do not leave Jerusalem, but wait for the gift my Father promised, which you have heard me speak about.
Yakobo onywalo Yucepu cwar Maliam mubedo min Yecu ma gilwoŋo Kricito-ni. 	and Jacob the father of Joseph, the husband of Mary, and Mary was the mother of Jesus who is called the Messiah.
latin tye ka medde mada ki donggo 	the child is growing very fast
buk maca tye kwene  	where is that book?
ka komme twerro banne ci ban wek ikel i ot 	if the chair can be folded, fold it and bring it into the house
kom romo obeddo ni yim  	the sheep is covered with flowing wool
I kare ma en tye ka wot, ma doŋ onyiko cok ki Damaciko, ci dero oa ki i polo oryeny ocaro kome. 	As he neared Damascus on his journey, suddenly a light from heaven flashed around him.
abili tye ka gwenno lok ki tek ki botte 	the policemen are interrogating him  
kare tin dong owec ki botwa 	there is favourable chance for us today
pido banya 	asking for the debt to be paid
ngwen kwon i kic ka dong icam  	roll kwon in the honey and then eat
oragge araga me donynyo i ot kacokke	he forced himself into the meeting house
jwayo coc woko ki i kom bao  	rubbing off writings from the black board
obog tyen dyang 	the hoot of a cattle 
Pien jo pa Lubaŋa ma gitye i Makedonia ki Akaya doŋ gumoko tamgi me jogo lim me konyo jo pa Lubaŋa ma gitye i Jerucalem ma can omakogi. 	Now, however, I am on my way to Jerusalem in the service of the Lord’s people there.
dano gitye ka jimmo i nyim kot 	people are assembling before the court 
en bene nio wang ma ekatto penynye twal pe ewekko kwannone 	he too until passed the examination, he will not give up the study 
yal anyira keny 	give presents to the bridemaids 
tem latin meno twerro palle pien tukko twatwal I kilaci 	the child's cheek can be slapped because he plays too much in class 
ringo akic en aye maber mada me acella	the loin meat is the one that is very nice for frying or roasting
rut otiko magi me arukka ki tol man	thread these beads for wearing with this thread
lwak dyang man 	herd of cattle
Ento latinni man obino ma olanyo limmi ducu i kom mon ma lucoco, in inekke wod twon mucwe!’ 	But when this son of yours who has squandered your property with prostitutes comes home, you kill the fattened calf for him!’
Ka ce dano mo pe miyo gin mo me konyo wadine, makato pi jo me ode kikome, noŋo doŋ okwero niyene woko, dok bene odoko rac makato ŋat ma pe oye Lubaŋa. 	Give the people these instructions, so that no one may be open to blame.
tyen lok 	cause of the problem or meaning of the word
cung i doggola wek pe odony 	stand in the door so as to hinder him from entering
wuciti wutit bot utmegina ni myero gucit i Galilaya, ci gibinena ki kunnu.” 	Then Jesus said to them, “Do not be afraid
Ka doŋ oyabo ka ma gimwono me aryone, ci awinyo lee makwo me aryone ka loko ni, “Bin!” 	When the Lamb opened the second seal, I heard the second living creature say, “Come!”
regge dok piny okonynye 	bending helped him from getting hurt 
“Wode madit onoŋo tye i poto	“Meanwhile, the older son was in the field
yoone rac mada obeddo gaki gaki  	the road is too rough, full of stones
wan pe jo me dyewor nyo me piny macol. 	We do not belong to the night or to the darkness.
Pe tye ŋat mo ma dag kome kekene, ento pito ki cam dok gwoko maber macalo Kricito bene tiyo ki lwak jo muye en, 	and to present her to himself as a radiant church, without stain or wrinkle or any other blemish, but holy and blameless.
tye ka ukko dogge  	he is rinsing his mouth
anyogi dong oille mabecco mada i poto 	the maize is growing very well in the field
Doŋ ka inen dano ma pe giliro olubo gin ma giciko ma tye i cik, dano ma pe giliro-nu pe gibikwane calo ŋat ma giliro? 	Circumcision has value if you observe the law, but if you break the law, you have become as though you had not been circumcised.
Owacce matek ni, “A malo, icuŋ ki tyeni atir.” Ci oleŋŋe malo opye, ka cako wot. 	and called out, “Stand up on your feet!” At that, the man jumped up and began to walk.
gwaddo lobo ki i wang it wek pii omol 	removing the mud from the spring well with fingers so as to make it flow
Yecu ocako gamo ni, “Wun yalwak ma niyewu lam, abibedo kwedwu nio wa awene? Dok abidiyo cwinya i komwu nio wa awene ba? Wukel en bota kany.” 	“You unbelieving generation,” Jesus replied, “how long shall I stay with you? How long shall I put up with you? Bring the boy to me.”
dano ma la ngaa pe gimiyo jami 	an obstinate person is not given anything
Ka ŋat mo pwonyo mere lok mapat kun pe lubo lok ada pa Rwotwa Yecu Kricito pi pwony me diniwa, 	All who are under the yoke of slavery should consider their masters worthy of full respect, so that God’s name and our teaching may not be slandered.
Dano mo acel ma onoŋo ocuŋ ka ŋete ocako woto pala lucwanne, otoŋo ki opii pa ajwaka madit pa Lubaŋa, oŋuno ite woko. 	Then one of those standing near drew his sword and struck the servant of the high priest, cutting off his ear.
pim me cello luduko	aiming to shoot the guns
Kit ma wumito dano gutimwu, wun bene wutimgi kumeno 	Do to others as you would have them do to you.
I kare ma doŋ guwinyo lok pa kabaka, gucito ki yogi ci guneno lakalatwe ma yam koŋ guneno yo tuŋ wokceŋ ca otelo nyimgi, obino ocuŋ ki malo wa i kabedo ka ma onoŋo latin-nu tye iye. 	After they had heard the king, they went on their way, and the star they had seen when it rose went ahead of them until it stopped over the place where the child was.
ka icon i wii lacol got Ajulu ci inenno piny wa i Cudan 	when you stand on the peak of the Ajulu mountain, you can see far into Sudan 
ngaa ma bicammo wang ker pa wonne? 	who will be the successor or heir to his father's kingship? 
ngaa ma tin giketto me beddo lapok cam ki litino? 	who has been made today to be a distributor of food the children?
danone dok lajogge twatwal 	the man is always delaying 
anyira gucitto ka nyarro obiya me gerro wii ot 	the girls have gone to cut the grass for thatching the root of the house
wotto ma kun cenynyo tyenne acenynya pien bur tye i opunynye 	walks on tip toes because there is ulcer on the heel
Gin ducu ma nyuto ni an lakwena kikome yam otimme i kinwu ki diyo cwiny madit, lanyut mogo, taŋo ki tic me aura madito. 	For when I am weak, then I am strong.
Lacen lupwonnye pa Jon gubino gutiŋo kome guyiko woko i lyel	His head was brought in on a platter and given to the girl, who carried it to her mother.
Yecu oa okato woko ki i kacokke, odonyo i ot pa Cimon. Maro Cimon onoŋo tye ki two lyeto ma obwoye matek	Jesus left the synagogue and went to the home of Simon
tyenne twerro nyubbe ki remo, daba nyo cet gweno 	his leg can be stained with blood, soiled with mud or chicken's droppings
Yecu owaco ni, “Wukel mugati ki rec aryo-ni bota kany.” 	“We have here only five loaves of bread and two fish,” they answered.
Petero obedo ka lubo kor Yecu ki cencen nio kwede wa i dyekal pa ajwaka madit	Peter followed him at a distance, right into the courtyard of the high priest
meno jane meera 	that is my slave, 
pwacco kom pe ber 	lacerating the body is not good
I latin pe twerro twoorro agulo woko 	the child cannot push down the pots 
too pa litino gin marac mada 	the deaths of children are very bad
Pyem ocakke i kin lupwonnye mogo pa Jon ki Lajudaya mo i kom lok me lonnye. 	(This was before John was put in prison.)
twara ma idonyo i ker pa Lubaŋa ma waŋi lakucel, kato ma kono giboli ki waŋi aryo ducu i Geena, 	It is better for you to enter the kingdom of God with one eye than to have two eyes and be thrown into hell,
nen labwor caa 	look or see the lion there 
tee ywaat myerro gilwokko nino ducu wek pe obed ma gwee 	the armpit must be washed daily in order to prevent it from smelling badly
ci en oa ki i lobo Judaya, odok i Galilaya. 	although in fact it was not Jesus who baptized, but his disciples.
Adada awacciwu ni, yalwak me kare man pe gibitum, nio waŋ ma lok magi ducu bitimme. 	Truly I tell you, this generation will certainly not pass away until all these things have happened.
Yecu otiyo lanyut mapol i nyim lupwonnyene, ma pe gicoyogi i buk man. 	Then Jesus told him, “Because you have seen me, you have believed; blessed are those who have not seen and yet have believed.”
obwoyo lawotte woko i tuko me dongge 	he defeated his companion in the boxing game 
oyee ni ebibino 	he accepted that he will come
borre rom mene me aa ki Kampala me citto Entebbe? 	What is the distance from Kampala to Entebbe? 
Ci cen maraco gubako doggi bote kun giwaco ni, “Kace imito ryemowa woko, cwalwa i opego-gu.” 	Some distance from them a large herd of pigs was feeding.
wabibino kwede ka nenowu, ka ce orune obino oyot. 	If he arrives soon, I will come with him to see you.
Ka ce onoŋo nen ni myero an bene aciti, ci wabicito kacel kwedgi. 	If it seems advisable for me to go also, they will accompany me.
en tye ki twer me beddo i ot kany 	he has the right to stay in this house
Kuc ki kica obed i kom jo ma poro kwogi ki cik man, ki i kom jo pa Lubaŋa ducu. 	May I never boast except in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, through which the world has been crucified to me, and I to the world.
labolone dong oteggi myerro dong gitong woko 	the banana is now fully developed, grown and mature, it should now be harvested
Lonyo pa Lubaŋa dwoŋ ma okato kare! Ryekone kacel ki ŋecce tut twatwal! Lok ma en ŋolo tere pe tatte, niaŋ i kite tek! 	For God has bound everyone over to disobedience so that he may have mercy on them all.
gigoyo gwiny awobe tin mada ki gayi 	the boys were beaten very much with the Bengal canes
yat ma gingommo ka dong girwakko i opoko opuk ka gicakko tellone ki tol ma rommo aboro en aye ma gigoyo kun opuk kono beddo terre madit ma miyo moor winynye ma logo 	an opuk consists of a piece of wood that has been bent and put in the shell of the tortoise and then tightened by eight strings which are played to produce music, while the shell of the tortoise forms the base which amplifies the sound
Ka onoŋo pud guro lok man, nen, co aryo gucuŋ i ŋetgi ma guruko jor ma ryeny lidaŋdaŋ. 	but when they entered, they did not find the body of the Lord Jesus.
wil muyembe ma ocek keken, pe iwil mape ocek 	buy only ripe mangoes, do not buy unripe ones
Yecu onoŋo ŋeyo ni Won otyeko miyo jami ducu i ciŋe, dok ni ea ki bot Lubaŋa, dok edok bot Lubaŋa. 	The evening meal was in progress, and the devil had already prompted Judas, the son of Simon Iscariot, to betray Jesus.
locco ma dong kwanynyo kuc pa dano woko pe ber 	governing that takes away the peace of the people is not good 
Ka doŋ owinyo cik ma kit meno, oketogi i kicika ma i tyelo, oroyo okol i tyengi. 	When he received these orders, he put them in the inner cell and fastened their feet in the stocks.
lacoone lokke miyo mada  	the man's talk is very polished
twoo nyamucuna omakko latin woko laworo 	the child has been affected by chicken pox since yesterday
dyel tye ka rammo bongona caa cit wuryam woko 	the goat is eating my cloth there, go and chase it away
pii litino ka lweny 	incite the children to fight 
dano ma nyab 	a lazy person
coda tye kitte ma patpat, lubbo kit akure ma girubbo kwede 	there are many types of soda depending upon the flavour with which it is mixed
ceng tyerro meja woko 	the sun makes the table crack or split
lwer jang yadi matino woko 	cut off the small branches of the trees or prune the trees 
Ka otyeko loko lok man, ci oketo cokke woko.	After he had said this, he dismissed the assembly.
Pi meno cikke me donyo i yweyo pa Lubaŋa pud tye, ento myero wabedu ma lwor, wek ŋat mo i kinwu pe ginoŋ ni opoto woko me o iye. 	Therefore, since the promise of entering his rest still stands, let us be careful that none of you be found to have fallen short of it.
wubin waneke woko, wek lim ma en bileyo-ni obed mewa.’ 	“But when the tenants saw the son, they said to each other, ‘This is the heir
dano ma nywenne atata myerro pe wuwotto kwedde 	you should not go with a person who delays too much
leggo odilo citto malo 	kicking the ball very high
gugge piny kong ka wek inen maber 	bend down first so that you may see it clearly 
dano gubakke ni rim i bar odilo 	people assembled in large numbers in the football field
Yecu owaco botgi ni, “An bene pe abitito botwu kit twer mumiyo atiyo lok magi.” 	Jesus said, “Neither will I tell you by what authority I am doing these things.”
lak latin dong o oo woko 	the child's teeth have fallen out
dano oduny ki ngwec woko nia ki ot nenno cal 	people ran out of the cinema hall 
jalle komme wac mada, nino ducu tikko bedo mere ka lwekko piny keken, pe tiyo gin mo 	the fellow is very lazy, he is always roaming about, doing nothing
jal man dong onyakko yer umme ma pe twerre	this man has now overgrown too much moustache
coyo matino nyiki-nyiki 	writes in very small letters
cwec mitte mada ki dako ma nywal teereteere 	a woman who has frequent pregnancies needs a lot of fat
oweko ngwen kom tuk	he has left white ants on the tuk
Wuyenyo i ginacoya, pien wutamo ni i gin wutye ki kwo ma pe tum, 	nor does his word dwell in you, for you do not believe the one he sent.
Kica pa Rwotwa Yecu Kricito obed kwedwu. 	The grace of the Lord Jesus be with you.
I kare ma Yecu doŋ oa ki kunnu omedde ki wotte, ci lutowaŋ aryo gulube, ma gudaŋe matek ni, “Kica omaki i komwa do, Lakwar Daudi.” 	News of this spread through all that region.
Yam i kare macon en oye ni rok ducu gulub yogi kengi. 	In the past, he let all nations go their own way.
Lok i kom yatariya ki tuŋ bot jo ma tye ka rwenyo woko, nen calo gin me miŋo, ento ki tuŋ botwa, wan jo ma Lubaŋa tye ka larowa, obedo tek pa Lubaŋa. 	For the message of the cross is foolishness to those who are perishing, but to us who are being saved it is the power of God.
amarro rukko cati matar twatwal 	I like wearing or putting on white shirts 
I kare ma Jon owinyo pi tic pa Yecu ki i mabuc, ci ooro lupwonnyene bot Yecu 	When John, who was in prison, heard about the deeds of the Messiah, he sent his disciples
Gin dok gudwogo i Jerucalem. Ka onoŋo en tye ka wot i ot pa Lubaŋa ci ajwagi madito pa Lubaŋa ki lupwonycik ki ludoŋo gubino bote. 	They arrived again in Jerusalem, and while Jesus was walking in the temple courts, the chief priests, the teachers of the law and the elders came to him.
cittu wii tuura ka wek wupyee maber i pii 	go up the raised river bank so that you may jump well into the river
wacammo ringo ma ngic 	we ate chilled beef 
giwotto ki kokko beddi waa 	they were walking with much noise of from crying
Wun wegi opii, wuti ki opiiwu i yo ma atir ma romrom, kun wuŋeyo ni, wun bene laditwu tye malo i polo. 	Such regulations indeed have an appearance of wisdom, with their self-imposed worship, their false humility and their harsh treatment of the body, but they lack any value in restraining sensual indulgence.
dwar arum pe ber pien miyo ginekko lee maditto ki matinone ducu 	the hunt where the big animals and the small animals are killed is not good 
Utmega, amito wuŋe lok man, ni, lok me kwena maber ma ceŋ atito botwu-ni pe obedo gin pa dano. 	Am I now trying to win the approval of human beings, or of God? Or am I trying to please people? If I were still trying to please people, I would not be a servant of Christ.
cit iciom cet dyang i akul me puyo odero	go and get cow dung from the cattle pen for plastering the winnow 
tam gin ma imitto tiyo dikki tin 	think today of what you want to do tomorrow 
muyembe man nyak mada 	this mango tree produces a lot of fruits
Ento ka doŋ wato kacel ki Kricito, waye ni wabibedo kwo kacel kwede bene. 	because anyone who has died has been set free from sin.
Pe wuwek pwony mogo mapatpat dok ma welo gurwenywu woko	Do not be carried away by all kinds of strange teachings
En olworo waŋe i komgi ki kiniga, cwinye ocwer pi nwaŋ cwinygi. Owaco bot dano-nu ni, “Rye badi.” En oryeyo bade ci bade ocaŋ. 	He looked around at them in anger and, deeply distressed at their stubborn hearts, said to the man, “Stretch out your hand.” He stretched it out, and his hand was completely restored.
Lamalaika dok onyutta kulu me pii me kwo, ma mil amila lamakmak calo gweŋ ma mil, ma onoŋo mol kun a ki i komker pa Lubaŋa ki pa Latin romo, 	Then the angel showed me the river of the water of life, as clear as crystal, flowing from the throne of God and of the Lamb
Kono Cwiny Maleŋ aye bedo ka titta ki i gaŋ ducu ni twec ki can madwoŋ aye tye ka kura. 	I only know that in every city the Holy Spirit warns me that prison and hardships are facing me.
ceng ranno bel woko 	the sun stunts the corn in its growth, or makes the corn to remain short
ka okecco ci dongge judde woko 	when she is angry, her lips pout out 
Ka dano giwaco ni, “Kuc tye, piny okwe mot, gin mo marac pe,” to biturugi atura calo arem me nywal ma turu dako muyac, ka larre biloyogi woko. 	While people are saying, “Peace and safety,” destruction will come on them suddenly, as labor pains on a pregnant woman, and they will not escape.
Yecu olwoŋo jone apar wiye aryo kacel, omiyo botgi tek ki twero i kom cen ducu, ki me caŋo two, 	When Jesus had called the Twelve together, he gave them power and authority to drive out all demons and to cure diseases,
yer Iwak karartac ma oket kiye ot iteer iciwanggi woko 	collect all the papers which are scattered all over the floor and take and burn them
litino cukul myerro wiigi pe janynye i kom lupwnygi 	the school children must not rise against their teachers
giterro ladit ka penynyone 	the gentleman was taken for questioning
tic me pac tek, pe tic ma yot 	carpentry is very difficult, not easy work
Ci Agripa owaco bot Festo ni, “Kono dano-ni pe obolo pi Cecar, kono gitwero gonye woko.”	Agrippa said to Festus, “This man could have been set free if he had not appealed to Caesar.”
tye ki Iwak lok mapol ata, pe wang eye mene ma adaa 	he has numerous words, we do not know which one is right
ento ka guneno kitwu maleŋ ma nen me woro. 	Wives, in the same way submit yourselves to your own husbands so that, if any of them do not believe the word, they may be won over without words by the behavior of their wives,
Wubed jo ma bal mo pe i komwu, kit macalo Wonwu ma tye i polo bal mo pe i kome-ni.	Be perfect, therefore, as your heavenly Father is perfect.
Ento i kare ma doŋ oryemo lwak gukato woko, ci en odonyo i ot omako latin nyako-nu ki ciŋe, nyako-nu oa malo. 	The girl is not dead but asleep.” But they laughed at him.
en aye laden ma tucu del kom ci donyo yikke iteere kuno, ma dako ne iye donggo kuno dokko madit ma nogo opong tong  	jigger is a flea which burrows under the skin and develops there, the female ones, the abdomen becomes greatly distended with eggs
iteerre pi ngoo?  	why do you take him?
leg ladit tied wek otimmi kica pi ballo jammine mapol 	beg your master to forgive you for spoiling many of his things
tweyo dyel 	tying the goat
tyen leela otoo woko mitto apikka 	the bicycle tyre is flat, it needs to be inflated
gitye ka mukke ki yadi matye i dye kal 	they are uprooting the trees on the compound
I kare ma wutye ka wot wutit lok, kun wuwaco ni, ‘Ker me polo doŋ onyiko cok.’ 	As you go, proclaim this message: ‘The kingdom of heaven has come near.’
Kwariwu yam gucamo manna i tim, guto woko. 	I am the bread of life.
imyenno kwonne ocwiny maber? 	have you made nice kwon which is neither soft nor hard? 
kal dong tye ka gok 	the millet is blooming or flowering
ladwar dong oyubbo pekine me citto ka dwar 	the hunter has already made provisions for going to hunt
wol gwok 	poison the dong
tong gweno oro pe toko ducu	not all eggs laid in the dry season hatch out
Ci olego ni, “Abba, Wora, jami ducu twerre ki boti	“Abba, Father,” he said, “everything is possible for you
En doŋ omwono lanen mere woko i komwa, dok oketo Cwiny mere Maleŋ i iwa, me moko ni en bimiyowa gin ducu ma en yam ociko. 	But as surely as God is faithful, our message to you is not “Yes” and “No.”
Ka ce Lubaŋa ruko lum ma i tim kit meno, ma bedo tye pi nino ma tin keken, ento diki inoŋo gibolo woko i keno, ci en pe birukowu makato, wun jo ma niyewu nok? 	Yet I tell you that not even Solomon in all his splendor was dressed like one of these.
Utmegina, wubed ki yomcwiny madwoŋ ka gitemowu i yo mapatpat, 	Consider it pure joy, my brothers and sisters,[a] whenever you face trials of many kinds,
Orwone doki, Jon ka ocuŋ ki jo aryo i kom lupwonnyene, 	I have seen and I testify that this is God’s Chosen One.”
Cutcut ladit olwoŋe ci owacce ni, ‘In latic marac! Aweki banya ca woko ducu pien onoŋo ilega kun ibako dogi bota	“Then the master called the servant in
Orwone jo ma yam gudoŋ loka nam tuŋcel guneno ni onoŋo tye yeya acel keken kunnu, dok ni Yecu nene pe oito i yeya kacel ki lupwonnyene, ento lupwonnyene ceŋ gucito kengi. 	Then they were willing to take him into the boat, and immediately the boat reached the shore where they were heading.
but ataro wek gipim ii 	lie with your face upwards or on your back so that your abdomen may be examined
piny tin oruu marac 	there is trouble today
pwony mitto dano ma kiniga pe makko oyot oyot, ma katto ka ipwonyno litino matino 	teaching requires people who are calm who do not get angry quickly, especially when teaching the very young ones
coc ma gicoyo kom bao macol ni twerro jwaye maleng mada 	the writing on the black-board can be wiped clean
Wan jo ma watek myero wakonyu jo magoro i gin ma loyogi, ento pe watamu pi yomo cwinywa kekenwa. 	But whoever has doubts is condemned if they eat, because their eating is not from faith; and everything that does not come from faith is sin.
bur tye i puny tyenne ma lacam 	there is an ulcer on his left heel
ka latin acel tye ki kwidi cwaa ci makko litino mukene bene pien gicammo ka acel i atabo acel ki ciggi 	if one child has thread worms, all the others will also be infected because they eat with their fingers from one bowl
ma pe bilimo makato meno tyen mapol i kare man, ki i kare ma bibino anyim en binoŋo kwo ma pe tum.” 	will fail to receive many times as much in this age, and in the age to come eternal life.”
“Koŋ doŋ wuwiny carolok i kom lacoc. 	“Listen then to what the parable of the sower means:
ajuu omakko latinne woko	the child is very lazy or he is suffering from laziness
Ka dok awinyo ginaketa ducu ma tye i polo, ki i wi lobo, ki piny i te lobo, ki ma gitye i nam-gu ki gin ducu ma tye iye, ma giloko ni, “Pwoc ki woro ki deyo ki twero obed nakanaka bot ŋat ma obedo i wi komker, ki bot Latin romo!” 	Then I heard every creature in heaven and on earth and under the earth and on the sea, and all that is in them, saying: “To him who sits on the throne and to the Lamb be praise and honor and glory and power, for ever and ever!”
gujoggo cente 	they collected the money
Pien moo man ka kono gicato acata, onoŋo kono okelo lim madit atika, ka wek gimi bot lucan.” 	“This perfume could have been sold at a high price and the money given to the poor.”
lokke pe pide i kot 	the matter cannot be settled in court or the case cannot be taken to court
nud nyuka ki latin 	make porridge or gruel for the child
Yecu owaco bot lupwonnyene ni, “Yam tye ŋat mo ma lalonyo, ma tye ki lagwok-jamine. Gidoto danonu bote ni tye ka lanyo jamine. 	And they stayed continually at the temple, praising God.
Ento Caulo ma gilwoŋo bene ni Paulo, ka opoŋ ki Cwiny Maleŋ, ociko waŋe i kome, 	Then Saul, who was also called Paul, filled with the Holy Spirit, looked straight at Elymas and said,
ka wun ducu wubeddo paco ci wii welo twerro jolle maber 	if all of you stay at home, the guests can be well received welcomed
obolle buk 	he threw a book to him
en myerro mada ki tic ma wamitto lye dano 	he is suitable for the job for which we want a person
I kacokke onoŋo tye iye dano ma tye ki cen marac	In the synagogue there was a man possessed by a demon, an impure spirit
Ka jo ma onoŋo gucuŋ kunnu guwinyo lokke, ci guwacci, “Laco man tye ka lwoŋo Elia.” 	About three in the afternoon Jesus cried out in a loud voice, “Eli, Eli, lema sabachthani?” (which means “My God, my God, why have you forsaken me?”).
ki bot Acoli gangi obeddo me deyo me arukka i gut keken 	to the Acholi cowrie shells were for honour and for necklaces only
cente ma jigi-jigi ni tye kwene? 	where are the coins cent pieces?
wir wii latin woko i kom tuko mupira 	turn the child away from playing football
Man aye gin ma bimiyo gineno jo ma gin litino pa Lubaŋa ki jo ma gin litino pa Catan: ŋat ma pe timo gin ma tye atir pe latin pa Lubaŋa, kadi wa ŋat ma pe maro ominne bene. 	This is how we know who the children of God are and who the children of the devil are: Anyone who does not do what is right is not God’s child, nor is anyone who does not love their brother and sister.
Ada awaco botwu ni, ladit-tu bimiye twero me loyo jamine woko ducu. 	Truly I tell you, he will put him in charge of all his possessions.
caani pe tye ka nyutto caa atiir, cit ka yubbone ne  	the clock is not showing the right time, go and adjust it
oronynyo wangge i ot ki i wang dirica 	he glanced into the house through the window
Kit macalo tye-ni, tye dul mapol, ento kom tye acel. 	As it is, there are many parts, but one body.
cweer me yer man, i kom laa man ber mada 	the scraping off of hairs from this hide is very good
jalle tye ka myenno lok amyenna pe tito lok atiir korre ki kore 	the fellow does not speak straight and according to the sequent of the event but mixing his words about 
Yecu ogamo ni, “Dwan man pe obino pira, ento piwu. 	The crowd that was there and heard it said it had thundered; others said an angel had spoken to him.
ŋat acel i kin lutim maraco ma giguro kacel kwede ocaye kun waco ni, “In pe i Kricito ma Lubaŋa oyero ce? Larre keni wa ki wan bene!” 	One of the criminals who hung there hurled insults at him: “Aren’t you the Messiah? Save yourself and us!”
Pien kiniga pa dano pe cobo tic ma atir i nyim Lubaŋa. 	because human anger does not produce the righteousness that God desires.
ringo adet mit mada ka gibullo abulla nyo gicello acella	the fresh meat is very nice when it is grilled or fried
En aye mukwo?o katti ati ki jami ducu, dok bene i en jami ducu ribbe kacel. 	For in him all things were created: things in heaven and on earth, visible and invisible, whether thrones or powers or rulers or authorities; all things have been created through him and for him.
Yecu owaco ni, “Aba, wayi tim kica botgi, pien pe giŋeyo gin ma gitye ka tiyone.” Gubolo kwir pi poko ginarukane. 	Jesus said, “Father, forgive them, for they do not know what they are doing.” And they divided up his clothes by casting lots.
Iwit yat, root of a tree 	lwit yat gitiyo kwedde i yoo ma pat pat macallo magi
kikopo man pat ki kikopo maca 	this cup is different from the other one there 
mon guterro kalgi i wii pata ka twoo iye 	the women took their millet to the flat rock to dry it there 
gunyammo kongo laworo mape wacce 	they took too much alcohol yesterday
bur tye i par tyen latin 	ulcer is on the back of the child's foot 
puyo kom ot	to plaster the house or to decorate decorating the house 
gikello ma gitweyo donge woko ni gig ki pigi 	he came with his hands tightly handcuffed 
obinno ni nyanya nyanya 	came in great numbers 
pol dong tye ka waare 	the clouds are clearing away
oyoo okatto ni nyul ki i ococce ci origgo woko 	the rat came out unexpectedly from its hole and ran away
Yecu ogamo ni, “Ka aketo deyo i koma kena, deyona mwa	At this they exclaimed, “Now we know that you are demon-possessed! Abraham died and so did the prophets, yet you say that whoever obeys your word will never taste death.
Pi meno kadi wa gicikke mukwoŋo ca gimoko ki remo. 	This is why even the first covenant was not put into effect without blood.
bki dwani ma otwoo ki coda ene 	wet your dry throat with this bottle of soda
jalle dong okil i ticce	the fellow is now polished in his work
dako ma lacaar caar nyo lacaaro wekko jami ata i dye ot pe cokkongi ci kannogi woko 	a careless woman who leaves all the things scattered in the house and never collects them and puts them away 
i kom gweni abic yer iye aryo wek iteer 	out of these chicken select two and take 
dok pe wutamo ni bibedo ber botwu ka dano acel oto pi lwak, wek pe gityek rokwa.” 	Then one of them, named Caiaphas, who was high priest that year, spoke up, “You know nothing at all!
lee jamine kong ka dong itam kit ma ibitiyo kwedde 	first inherit the things and then decide what to do with them 
gin mapol ma kello poyo i kom dano macallo mac, bur, moo acid moo acki en aye kello poyo marac twatwal 	there are many things that cause scars, for example, burns by fire, ulcers, acids the acid causes the worst scar which heals with a big keloki
nwoyo reggo nyim 	to grindthe simsim paste over again
“Adada gucokke gugurre kacel i gaŋ man i kom laticci maleŋ twal Yecu, en ma in iwiro ki moo, gin Kerode ki Pontio Pilato, kacel ki Lurok ki jo Icrael ducu, 	Indeed Herod and Pontius Pilate met together with the Gentiles and the people of Israel in this city to conspire against your holy servant Jesus, whom you anointed.
pacco dek	taking a good amount of food with fingers
cukane gilwokko ma taar mada 	the sheet has been washed very white
lakeyo konynyo daayo mada  	niece helps grandmother very much
piny lyet  	the weather is hot
guummo lokke woko 	they kept the affair secret 
Lacen lupwonnye gubino bot Yecu i muŋ gupenye ni, “Gin aŋo mugeŋowa ryemone?” 	Jesus rebuked the demon, and it came out of the boy, and he was healed at that moment.
Ka aŋiyo kome cok, ci aneno iye lee, ki ŋuu ma camo riŋo, ki kwa anyai ducu ki winyo me polo. 	I looked into it and saw four-footed animals of the earth, wild beasts, reptiles and birds.
okok yukku yoogi ki i ngom 	the termites push up the earth from beneath to make their way
i nyim Lubaga wan ducu luballo 	before God we are all sinners 
rwatto ot nyo dero	to plaster the walls of hut or granary with clay
lacooni dong opoo woko 	the man has become mad
nyuka ka okwee ci licce woko 	when the gruel gets cold it becomes watery 
Ci gumake gubole woko ki i poto olok, ka guneke woko. 	Come, let’s kill him and take his inheritance.’
kun iye paro yeŋo ki gin ma oo piny ki i wi meja pa lalonyo-nu	At his gate was laid a beggar named Lazarus, covered with sores
Wubin bota, jo ducu muol ki ma yec onurowu, ci abimiyo wuywe. 	“Come to me, all you who are weary and burdened, and I will give you rest.
Lupwonnyene mapol ka guwinyo, guwacci, “Man lok matek	He said this while teaching in the synagogue in Capernaum.
laa dong jok oonynyo marac mada i kom latin 	the child has got small rashes all over his body
tye ka wirro yat moni wek komme obokke woko	he is smearing dyeing his body with a certain medicine so that her body may become brown 
jalle dong orii mada ka pwonno muyembe	the fellow has taken too long to pluck the mangoes
Gitimo man wek dano mo pe owil jami, nyo kadi ki catone, ka pe tye ki poyo meno i kome, ma meno obedo nyiŋ lee ca, nyo namba me nyiŋe. 	so that they could not buy or sell unless they had the mark, which is the name of the beast or the number of its name.
Doki awinyo ka dwan ma onoŋo oa ki i polo-ni tye ka lok kweda tyen me aryo kun wacci, “Cit ikwany buk adola ma oyabbe ma tye i ciŋ lamalaika ma ocuŋ i wi nam ki i lobo-ni.” 	Then the voice that I had heard from heaven spoke to me once more: “Go, take the scroll that lies open in the hand of the angel who is standing on the sea and on the land.”
wangge pek  	his face is heavy and fag, he looks fierce, or has forbkiding look, charismatic look
canne matek wek iwil dyang 	struggle very hard so that you may buy a cow 
Pien ka wucokke kacel pe wucamo. Cam pa Rwotwa, 	So then, when you come together, it is not the Lord’s Supper you eat,
pien onoŋo Lubaŋa oyubo gin mo maber makato kun otamo piwa, ni meno, gin pe myero gudok jo mabeco muteggi laboŋo wan.	since God had planned something better for us so that only together with us would they be made perfect.
gin luwooro mada  	they are very greedy and selfish people
latin gwinynyo gwinynye twatwal myero obed ki olwinyo 	this child scratches too much his anus, he must have hookworms
tee ywaat beddo gwee mada ka pe gilwokko teretere 	the armpit does smell very badly if it is not washed frequently
Pilato dok openyo lwak ni, “Dano ma wulwoŋo ni kabaka pa Lujudaya-ni doŋ abitimo niŋniŋ?” 	“What shall I do, then, with the one you call the king of the Jews?” Pilate asked them.
gin dok gidonggo gikatto aribe 	they are bigger than aribe
pwacco kom pe ber	to lacerate the body is not good 
pien Jon onoŋo owaco bote ni, “Cik pe oye ni ibed ki ci-omeru.” 	and he said to his attendants, “This is John the Baptist; he has risen from the dead! That is why miraculous powers are at work in him.”
wang otyeno, in the evening  	wang tino, childhood, childish, in the early age
kot tye ka loyo matafali ma numo woko 	the rain is dissolving or washing away the sun dried bricks
man en aye nyako ma myero i nyom 	this the suitable girl that you should marry 
Ento koŋo vino manyen myero gipik i kicaa manyen bene. 	Otherwise, the new wine will burst the skins; the wine will run out and the wineskins will be ruined.
Acoli ma yang con gipikko nyim ki ngor i opiro 	long time ago the Acholi used to keep their simsim and cowpeas in the leather bags
Ento pe guniaŋ lok ma en owaco	The disciples did not understand any of this
kadi bed kit meno, myero wuŋe man ni, ker pa Lubaŋa doŋ onyiko cok.’ 	Yet be sure of this: The kingdom of God has come near.’
odaa ki laremme 	he quarrelled with his friend
moo cwer ci pe tye ka yoorro maber 	the oil is forming but not coining out very well
tin iwekko doggola lapero pe ilorro 	today you left the door open, you did not close it
Apokapoka mo pe iye	This righteousness is given through faith in Jesus Christ to all who believe
pe gunoŋo yo me keto can i komgi pi lwak dano, pien gin ducu gubedo ka pako Lubaŋa pi gin mutimme-ni. 	They could not decide how to punish them, because all the people were praising God for what had happened.
pak lak palaa man ma bit 	sharpen the edge of this knife very well
myelle bibeddo awene 	when will the dance be? 
palle apalla ki piki pikine i kin motoka 	rides criss-cross between the cars with his motor cycle
gitye ki gum jo ducu ma mwol 	blessed are those who are meek
gilwoŋo lwoŋo matek kun gipenyo ka nyo Cimon ma gilwoŋo Petero otiro kenyo. 	They called out, asking if Simon who was known as Peter was staying there.
Lega ma niye tye iye bicaŋo latwo, Rwot bitiŋe malo	And the prayer offered in faith will make the sick person well; the Lord will raise them up
en one mada 	he coughs too much 
pe watimo ŋat mo marac, pe wabalo ŋat mo, pe bene wabuyo ŋat mo pi mito lim. 	Make room for us in your hearts
Nen, lutowaŋ aryo ma gubedo piny i ŋet yo ka guwinyo ni meno aye Yecu ma obekato-ni, ci gudaŋŋe matek ni, “Lakwar Daudi, timwa kica ba!” 	Two blind men were sitting by the roadside, and when they heard that Jesus was going by, they shouted, “Lord, Son of David, have mercy on us!”
Gin gucako bino i Betecaida, ci jo mogo gukelo bote dano ma waŋe oto woko, gubako doggi ni oboŋ kome. 	They came to Bethsaida, and some people brought a blind man and begged Jesus to touch him.
yub leela oyot oyot 	repair the bicycle quickly 
lupwony myerro pe gubed lumeerro kongo 	teachers must not be drunkards 
Ka guo Cecaria gumiyo waraga bot laloyo, ka gutero Paulo bene i nyime. 	When the cavalry arrived in Caesarea, they delivered the letter to the governor and handed Paul over to him.
Ento myero wujiŋ cwinywu kekenwu kare ducu ka pud wutwero lwoŋo ni, “Tin”, wek ŋat mo i kinwu pe cwinye odok nwaŋ pi bwola me bal. 	But encourage one another daily, as long as it is called “Today,” so that none of you may be hardened by sin’s deceitfulness.
Dok ka Catan ocako lweny i kome kekene ce opokke kene, ci pe twero cuŋ, kerre gik woko. 	And if Satan opposes himself and is divided, he cannot stand; his end has come.
Guwaco bot Yecu ni, “Wan pe waŋeyo.” Yecu bene owacogi ni, “An bene pe abitito botwu kit twero mumiyo atiyo man.”	So they answered Jesus, “We don’t know.” Jesus said, “Neither will I tell you by what authority I am doing these things.”
acitto bot pilkiana wek okonya ki pido 	I went to my pleader to help me with my case
teggo apwa woko ki i bongo 	to shake the dust away from the clothes
bongo man mono ki in me rukkone	this cloth is unfit for you to wear 
tag wiye woko wek pe otii gin ma en mitto tiyone 	turn him away from doing what he wants to do
yatte twerro cutte ka munynye 	the medicine can be taken and swallowed
I kare meno Maliam oa, ocito oyotoyot i lobo ma obedo gotgot i gaŋ mo me Juda, 	At that time Mary got ready and hurried to a town in the hill country of Judea,
anyogine pud ber twerro bokke 	the maize is still good it can be steamed 
reyo remo i dogge 	smears blood on his lips
ginekko apwoyo i poto okono 	the hare was killed in the field of pumpkins
latinne komme wac mada omiyo obeddo lalee dong kika pa dano 	the child was very lazy, that was why he roamed from door to door of people's homes
odii pul girubbo ki pii ci gipiyo dokko olel pul ma en aye dong dek ma gicammo 	groundnut paste is mixed with water and stirred with pestle to form a sauce which is then eaten
nyakone pwot? pe aneno ka kit pwotte 	is the girls slender? no I did not notice her slenderness
gin marac mape larre 	a very bad thing indeed 
latinne dong teyo 	her daughter is already walking though still unsteadily
jig go donggo bene aa pi cam ma pe mabecco ma miyo litino gidonggo 	stunting also comes as a result of lack of good food which makes the children grow
Cwinygi obedo yom, gucako cikke me miye lim. 	They were delighted and agreed to give him money.
Ci gikelo bote latowaŋ mo ma tye ki cen marac, ma pe loko, ci Yecu ocaŋe. Cutcut ladogeoto otugi lok dok oneno piny bene.	In his name the nations will put their hope.”
Gumiye but rec ma gubulo, 	And while they still did not believe it because of joy and amazement, he asked them, “Do you have anything here to eat?”
anyoo gitwerro geggone me makko litino kace gigwerrogi ma noggo pud gitino 	children can be prevented from getting measles if they are immunised while they are still young
Dok kit macalo giyubo ni, dano to kicel, ka doŋ ki i ŋeye ŋolo kop cakke, 	Just as people are destined to die once, and after that to face judgment,
I kare ma doŋ onoŋo gikato woko, gurwatte ki dano mo me Cirene ma nyiŋe Cimon, ci gudiye tektek me tiŋo yatariya pa Yecu. 	They spit on him, and took the staff and struck him on the head again and again.
Ceŋ aorowu ka kayo gin ma yam pe wucanne iye	Thus the saying ‘One sows and another reaps’ is true.
twon labwor en aye tye ki wino madowong igutte ki igeye, minne pe kwedde 	the male lion has a large mane on its neck and back, the female has none 
dako ma wangge beddi rya-rya 	a lascivious woman, a prostitute 
Ka gubino kany, ci an bene pe adikke, ento orwone abedo i kom me ŋolo kop ci aciko ni kigele. 	When they came here with me, I did not delay the case, but convened the court the next day and ordered the man to be brought in.
werro kado mamit i dek 	seasoning the sauce very well
piyo lawotti me matto taa	to persuade your friend to smoke
gin ŋeyo lok ma awaco.” 	Why question me? Ask those who heard me
itto wii got 	climbing the mountain
Nino me Mugati ma Tobi Pe Iye oromo, ma gitumo iye latin romo me Kato. 	Then came the day of Unleavened Bread on which the Passover lamb had to be sacrificed.
lalabbe otoo man tiyo tic maber mada, gilokko kwedde ki Qin keken 	this dumb person works very well, he is spoken to by hand signs only
ribbe ber omiyo kombedi pe dong gidaa 	reconciliation is good, that is why they do not quarrel now 
Pilato openye ni, “In i Kabaka pa Lujudaya bo?” Yecu ogamo ni, “Iwaco kakare gire.” 	So Pilate asked Jesus, “Are you the king of the Jews?” “You have said so,” Jesus replied.
Dok ka wubiwinyo pi mony, ki lok ma yweko pi mony, pe tipo komwu oto woko lirut	When you hear of wars and rumors of wars, do not be alarmed
parro mada ka latin tye ka kwan maber	worries very much if the child is studying well
rony pe ber 	making fun is not good 
“Utmego, myero alok botwu i kom kwarowa Daudi atir ni yam en oto dok giyiko kome, watye ki lyelle botwa kany nio wa tin. 	“Fellow Israelites, I can tell you confidently that the patriarch David died and was buried, and his tomb is here to this day.
lok mingo mingo willo wii dano woko  	foolish talks make people to forget
en pe opoko-yokki ma iyello twatwal kitmeno	he is not a simpleton person that you should trouble him like that
wangge umme woko i komme 	he becomes jealous of him, or he becomes cold towards him
Ka attitiwu lok me lobo, wun pe wuye, wubiye niŋniŋ ka atittiwu lok me polo? 	Very truly I tell you, we speak of what we know, and we testify to what we have seen, but still you people do not accept our testimony.
Ka guo i Antiokia, gucoko lwak muye Yecu kacel, ci gutuco gin ducu ma doŋ Lubaŋa otyeko tiyo kacel kwedgi, ki kit ma oyabo kwede doggola me niye bot Lurok. 	On arriving there, they gathered the church together and reported all that God had done through them and how he had opened a door of faith to the Gentiles.
lukwoo gupurre gumakko lacoomo ci guyakko jami woko liweng ki i komme 	the thieves jumped upon a person suddenly and robbed him of everything
agwata ma tek mac aye puku	hardned gourd is softened by fire
pur pe gin ma yot, ka pe kiiyo cwinynyi matek, pe itwerro purro poto madit 	cultivation is not an easy thing, if you are not determined, you cannot cultivate a large field
winyo pyee i wii yat  	birds alight and perch on the trees
En aye gin ma gijeŋo ma nyuto ni wabinoŋo gin ducu ma Lubaŋa oyubbe me miyo botwa i kare ma Lubaŋa bikoko jone kikome, ma bimiyo dano gipako deyone matek. 	in order that we, who were the first to put our hope in Christ, might be for the praise of his glory.
tyenni col 	your leg is dirty
tol me tweyo dog guniya 	string for tying the mouth of the gunny 
donyo i ot ki ot ci ywayo co wa ki mon ka tweyogi i mabuc. 	Going from house to house, he dragged off both men and women and put them in prison.
ka ludito gicammo amal, litino ginenno ki kee mada pien gin bene gimitti gicam 	the children yearn to eat the fried meat when they watch as the elders eat it
oywec alene ber mada	the broom made from alene is very good
mak ki cinggi ryo ryo 	hold with both your hands 
kombeddi doŋ wabedo kwo ka wacuŋ matek i Rwot. 	For now we really live, since you are standing firm in the Lord.
Ka aloko kumeno noŋo atamo aŋo? Ni cam ma gityero bot jogi obedo gin mo, nyo ni jogi gubedo gin mo? 	Do I mean then that food sacrificed to an idol is anything, or that an idol is anything?
ogilo lak labwor bocco dok dongo bene mada 	the lion's canine teeth are long and very big
Yecu openyogi ni, “Wutwero miyo luwot lanyom ri kec ma kun lanyom tye kwedgi? 	They said to him, “John’s disciples often fast and pray, and so do the disciples of the Pharisees, but yours go on eating and drinking.”
mayo kicaa ki i cig i dye taun 	snatching a handbag from a woman's hand in the town 
Atittiwu ni jo mapol bia ki tuŋ wokceŋ ki tuŋ potoceŋ gibibedo i dog cam kacel ki Abraim, Icaka ki Yakobo i ker me polo, 	When Jesus heard this, he was amazed and said to those following him, “Truly I tell you, I have not found anyone in Israel with such great faith.
gimakkongi pi jemmo  	they were arrested for striking or rebelling
latin lakke pe pieno ka kayo gin mo bammo abamma	the child has no teeth therefore it only bites lightly not penetrating 
pien en yam owaco ni, “Yam awinyi i kare me timo dano maber, yam akonyi i kare me laro dano.” Wunen, man aye kare ma gitimo iye ber bot dano. Tin aye nino me larre. 	As God’s co-workers we urge you not to receive God’s grace in vain.
Ka ceŋ odoŋ nino abicel me o i Kato (Paska), Yecu obino i Betania, ka ma Lajaro bedo iye, en ma ceŋ Yecu ocere ki i kin jo muto-ni. 	He has no hold over me,
atego en aye ber mada me gerro ot lobo pien bye pe cammo 	atego is the strong tree, which is not eaten by white ants, and so it is the best wood for building mud and wattle huts 
Onoŋo twero bedo ber ka kono gin pe guŋeyo yo me kit ma atir, kato ma guŋeyo ka dok giweko cik maleŋ ma gimiyogi woko. 	It would have been better for them not to have known the way of righteousness, than to have known it and then to turn their backs on the sacred command that was passed on to them.
lokke niangge maber 	the talk talk is understandable 
Ento kit ma en neno ki piny koni, pe waŋeyo	“We know he is our son,” the parents answered, “and we know he was born blind.
Pe wunene macalo lakworwu, ento wucike macalo ominwu. 	Yet do not regard them as an enemy, but warn them as you would a fellow believer.
Lwak gugamo ni “Man aye lanebi Yecu ma oa ki i Najaret me Galilaya.” 	When Jesus entered Jerusalem, the whole city was stirred and asked, “Who is this?”
ento kun pe omako Kricito matek ma en aye wic, ma miyo dul kom ducu limo cam, dok gikubbe kacel i waŋ mwot ki i ler, ka doŋ cako doŋo i kit ma Lubaŋa mito ni odoŋ kwede. 	These are a shadow of the things that were to come; the reality, however, is found in Christ.
lakur gang ocitto ka cam  	the home guard has gone to eat
myen kwon 	stir a mixer of millet flour and water in a container under fire until it becomes thick
tii matek wek dok gimed rwom me tic meeri 	work very hard so that you may be promoted in rank in your work 
Pien ka ce dano mo obedo lawiny lok keken ma pe tiyo, ci bedo calo ŋat ma ŋiyo waŋe ma ginywale kwede i kiyo. 	Anyone who listens to the word but does not do what it says is like someone who looks at his face in a mirror
cakke i kare meno gitito lok me kwena maber i kom ker pa Lubaŋa, dano ducu gitye ka donyo iye ki tek. 	“The Law and the Prophets were proclaimed until John
oboko kwer nino ducu ka giteddo girubbo ki dek mukene macallo rec nyo del raa 	when oboko kwer sauce is being cooked, it is usually mixed with other food as fish or hippopotamus hide
Polo ki lobo bitum, ento lokka pe bitum. 	Heaven and earth will pass away, but my words will never pass away.
lwokko kom dano 	taking or giving an offering to the spirit in order to leave someone's body 
gol wang otul man wek omol maber  	remove or clear this channel so that it may run well
miyo lim ki dano ma ticce dong mitto polo woko me konynye wek pe opotti 	to give some money to somebody whose business is failing to prop him up to prevent him from failing
Ocikogi ni, “Ka wudonyo i ot mo, wubed kenyo nio ka wubia ki i kabedo meno. 	Whenever you enter a house, stay there until you leave that town.
dano me abongwen ne tye kwene?	where is the nineth person? 
Doŋ awacci ni in i Petero, ma te lokke Pata, ci abimiyo lwak jo muye an gicuŋ i kom pata man, teko me to pe bitwero loyone. 	And I tell you that you are Peter, and on this rock I will build my church, and the gates of Hades will not overcome it.
gumiye koŋo vino ma girubo ki keda ni omati, ento i kare ma obilo, pe oye matone. 	They came to a place called Golgotha (which means “the place of the skull”).
man catte maber  	she is selling groundnuts in the market
Pien man aye gin ma cikke oloko ni, “Abidwogo i kare macalo man, ka doŋ Cara binywalo latin awobi.” 	In other words, it is not the children by physical descent who are God’s children, but it is the children of the promise who are regarded as Abraham’s offspring.
An abino i lobo pi bedo ceŋ me lobo, wek dano ducu ma ye an owek bedo i piny macol. 	The one who looks at me is seeing the one who sent me.
I kare meno lupwonnye gubino bot Yecu, gupenye ni, “Aŋa ma loyo ki dit i ker me polo?” 	At that time the disciples came to Jesus and asked, “Who, then, is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven?”
pwomo en aye yat ma lak alakka ci nyakko nyigge ma olungge ma katto tong gweno manok ma komme obeddo kikwar kwar ma ka ityerro nyigge ni ci inonggo pigge mamit mada ma tye iye nyigge matitino 	the passion fruit plant is one of the plants that runs along the ground or round a tree up to the top of the tree, it produces purplish fruits, which when you break, you find very nice sweet juice with 
unne me gerro otte kene	to suffer to build his house alone
I kare ma gilwoŋi onoŋo ibedo opii? Pe ipar. Ento ka inoŋo yo me a woko ki i opii, ci ti kwede. 	Were you a slave when you were called? Don’t let it trouble you—although if you can gain your freedom, do so.
tong gweno loo woko ka ionynyogi aonynya i aduku mape ikettongi ki acel acel 	the eggs will break and their contents will run out, if you pour them in the basket instead of putting them one by one
bonyo atiko gin bene giwotto i dul madowong ci ento pe rom ki pa bonyo abum 	red locusts also come in large swarms but not as large as that of greyish brown locusts
ngat ma tammoni en aye latek ci okatti opee twon dyang man 	lead this bull by pulling it behind him as they walk
Gin gipwonyo kit mogo ma cikwa pe ye ni wagam nyo walubgi, pien wan Luroma.” 	by advocating customs unlawful for us Romans to accept or practice.”
micon meera ma pirre tek en aye me pwonynyo dano me ngeyo Yecu 	my special mission is to teach the people to know Jesus
ento watye ki gen ni ka niyewu doŋ omedde, ticwa bene bimedde matek i kinwu, kun lubo ka ma yam gityeko poko botwa. 	Neither do we go beyond our limits by boasting of work done by others
lacoone dok Iawakke mada pe mitto lok ki dano atata 	he is a very proud fellow, he does not like to talk with ordinary people 
lunggo jang yat piny ka wek gipwon nyigge	to bend the branch of the tree down so that its fruits can be picked or plucked
lyerro awal i kor ot	to suspend gourd plate on the wall
rwicco ladep ki lwet cing 	crushing a flea with the finger nails
jwik me cweer pa remo dong cok 	the reduction of the bleeding is very near
Ka guo i Calamic, gutuco iye lok pa Lubaŋa i kacokke ducu pa Lujudaya	When they arrived at Salamis, they proclaimed the word of God in the Jewish synagogues
lacooni tye ka twooyo nimoniya marac twatwal 	the man is suffering very much from pneumonia
latin dong ongiyo woko ki odoo	the child is now used to being beaten, he does not fear it any more
Pien wun wutye kacel ki lucan kare ducu, dok wutwero konyogi i kare ducu ma wumito	The poor you will always have with you, and you can help them any time you want
Pien kom dano pe tye iye dul acel keken, ento tye iye dul mapol. 	Even so the body is not made up of one part but of many.
Kiniga omako Kerode i kom jo Turo ki Cidon	He had been quarreling with the people of Tyre and Sidon; they now joined together and sought an audience with him
biny waaro man me tol me kwoyo bongo 	twist this cotton wool into threads for sewing the clothes
ka gunoŋe ci guwacce ni, Dano ducu gitye ka yenyi.	and when they found him, they exclaimed: “Everyone is looking for you!”
ci owacci, “Abiwinyo lokki ka ludoti guo.” Ociko ni gigwoke i ot madit pa Kerode	he said, “I will hear your case when your accusers get here.” Then he ordered that Paul be kept under guard in Herod’s palace.
mwoddo layata ma numo  	eating uncooked potatoes
tyenni ma okwee ni ka ibeddo ka temmo wot mot mot kwedde pi nino ki nino, ci tekke bidwoggo cen 	if you try to walk with your paralysed leg slowly daily, its power will return
Ada awaco botwu ni ladit-tu bimiye twero me loyo jamine woko ducu. 	Truly I tell you, he will put him in charge of all his possessions.
luduku en aye okello ayella madit mada i wii lobo ducu pien dano pe gitiyo kwedde pi yoo ma atir  	the gun is the cause of all the troubles in the world because people do not use it for the right purposes
gulunynyogi mada i tuko me rette 	they defeated them thoroughly in the game of wrestling
dyang oputto loc woko pien pe giguurro maber i ngom 	a cow pulled otf the peg from the ground because it was not firmly fixed into the ground
latin maber winynyo lok pa wonne 	a good child listens to his father's words 
nyed agulu pa i wii wek warren ka itwerro 	carry the water pot and balance it on your head, for us to see if you can 
ogodo umme otwoo mape dong twerro twinynye 	the crust of mucus in his nose is so hard that it cannot be blown out
obinno ononggo cam wii meja ci otungi cakko cammone labonggo kurro dano mukene nyo penynyo ni giketto cam mi pi gaa 	he came and found food on the table and started to eat it stright away without waiting for other people or asking for whom was the food served
pe ilwor, cwinynyi myero pe obed ka ryangge	don't be afraid and terrified 
Ka pud gitye ka loko lok man, Yecu kikome ocuŋ i kingi, [owaco botgi ni, “Kuc obed i komwu!”] 	Then the two told what had happened on the way, and how Jesus was recognized by them when he broke the bread.
min Akelo tye ka pwoyo cak i ot 	Akelo's mother is churning the milk in the house 
litino gimaarro gitele mada me aterogi ki me bot aterogi 	the children love gitele very much for their arrows or arrow shafts
Dano ma tiyo tic pa Kricito kit meno aye yomo cwiny Lubaŋa, dok bene dano gipwoye. 	For the kingdom of God is not a matter of eating and drinking, but of righteousness, peace and joy in the Holy Spirit,
Gaŋ meno onoŋo yam twoke tye aŋwen ma giromrom, borre rom ki lacce, ci opimo cel ki odoone, oromo mairo alip acel ki miya abic	The city was laid out like a square, as long as it was wide
danone ladwala pe lokko lok atir 	the man is a stammerer, he does not speak clearly
nngom tutuno lyata dong tye ka baarru ma nyutte ni layata dong donggo ma rommo acamma 	these potato mounds are cracking which show that the potatoes are now big and ready for eating
gitye ka yorro pii i tee yat ma gipitto wek pe otwoo 	they are spraying the water under the planted tree to prevent it from drying
ci ŋwec moo oromo i ot ducu. 	Then Mary took about a pint of pure nard, an expensive perfume; she poured it on Jesus’ feet and wiped his feet with her hair
dwokwa gang 	return us home 
ka icammo lakodi gwana monni madowong ci kello nyong kom 	if you eat too much a certain cassava type, it brings weakness ot the body
en aye nyig yat nyo yaddi ma gigollo ka girubbo ki cukari ka dong giteddo ci beddo mit callo kic 	it is the fruits which are first shred and then mixed with sugar and boiled and become thick and sweet like honey
Mumiyo wacwalo botwu Juda ki Cira, gin bene kikomgi gibititowu lok ki doggi ma rom ki man ma wacoyo-ni. 	Therefore we are sending Judas and Silas to confirm by word of mouth what we are writing.
cwinynye yot  	he is unreliable, cannot keep secret
Ka wakwo, wakwo pi Rwot	For none of us lives for ourselves alone, and none of us dies for ourselves alone.
Pe tye askari mo ma ka tye i dog tic dok rwakke i tiyo tic ma woko, pien tamme tye ni myero eyom cwiny ŋat ma ocoye i mony. 	Join with me in suffering, like a good soldier of Christ Jesus.
Jaŋe ducu ma i koma ma pe nyak en lwero woko, ento jaŋa ducu ma nyak en lonyo, wek omedde, onyak mapol. 	“I am the true vine, and my Father is the gardener.
tube i lok pa litino ma kiteno pe konynyo gin mo wacel 	falling out to fight for children's word like that does not help at all
bor piny angoo niaa ki kany nio Entebbe? 	what is the distance from here to Entebbe? 
in itimmo go kany? 	what are you doing here? 
tye pud ka ganno tic cig pa litino cukul 	he is still marvelling at the pupils' hand work 
punno lawotti pe ber 	conning your friend is not good 
kec cam ki twoo en aye kello gollo wang 	starvation and illness are the causes of the sunken eyes 
i kare ma gia ki male i Cudan,joo mogo gupokke gudok tung Abicinia 	when they were coming down from upper Sudan, some of the people separated themselves and went towards Abyssinia
kwok onyirro i nyimme 	he has beads of sweat over his face or forming over his face
dano ma mitto beddo ma ryek myerro okwan kit buk ma patpat 	a person who wants to be clever 
kine mogo rete i mac kadi wa i pii-gu. Ka ce itwero timo iye gin mo, ci tim ber, ikonywa do.” 	But if you can do anything, take pity on us and help us.”
giwacci an arac pi cikka matek mada me binno keen ka tic 	they say that I am bad because of my strictness in the rule of lateness at work
pe twerro tinggo latin pien nino ducu retto latin 	she cannot carry the child because she always throws down the child 
wanggo buk dold ocakke nigning? 	how did burning of the books start? 
lak opilone oluu pe kwinynyo layata maber 	the tip of the small pointed stick is not sharp, cannot dig up the potatoes
odok tungkwenne? 	which direction has he gone? 
ginywalle i dwee me Apiril I dwee me agwen me mwaka 1935 	he was born in April, the fourth month of the year 1935
Purugia ki Pampulia, Ejipt ki lobo Libya ma dok tuŋ Cirene, ki welo ma gua ki i Roma ma gin Lujudaya ki jo ma gulokke gudonyo i diniwa, 	Phrygia and Pamphylia, Egypt and the parts of Libya near Cyrene; visitors from Rome
Petero oa obino bot Yecu ci openye ni, “Rwot omera mono bibalo bal bota tyen adi, ka dok atim kica bote. Pud dok abitimo bote kica ka obalo tyen abiro?” 	Then Peter came to Jesus and asked, “Lord, how many times shall I forgive my brother or sister who sins against me? Up to seven times?”
wanynyo pok labolo	to remove the thick skin of banana
Pi meno, laco acel acel i kinwu myero omar dakone macalo maro kome kene, ki dako bene myero onen ni eworo cware.	This is a profound mystery—but I am talking about Christ and the church.
Ento wan wabimine ka lega ki tito lok.” 	and will give our attention to prayer and the ministry of the word.”
pii mac i kom yat man 	make fire by drilling this wood 
ruu piny ki ruu piny latin no tiko koko, gin angoo ma yello? 	day by day that child is crying, what is the matter with him 
Wun lurema ka wutiyo gin ducu ma acikowu. 	Greater love has no one than this: to lay down one’s life for one’s friends.
Kodi mukene okir i kin okuto, okuto olot odiyogi woko, pe gunyako nyiggi. 	Other seed fell among thorns, which grew up and choked the plants, so that they did not bear grain.
akaa tek mada pe tuur oyot oyot kadi gigoyo ki dano	the Bengal cane is very strong and does not break easily even when used for beating people
litino me nino man dong pe gingeyo ger, gimitto mere gerro anyira agerra keken 	the children of these days do not know marriage, they want to have only sexual intercourse
odilo ka gibollo piny ci nyette dok male 	when a ball is thrown down, it bounces upwards 
ci gibikatti woko. Jo ma ceŋ gutimo maber bidonyo i cer me kwo, jo ma ceŋ gutimo marac bidonyo i cer me ŋolo kop. 	And he has given him authority to judge because he is the Son of Man.
lworo omakogi. 	When they came to Jesus, they found the man from whom the demons had gone out, sitting at Jesus’ feet, dressed and in his right mind; and they were afraid.
“Wubineno can, wun lupwony-cik ki Luparicayo, wun lugoba! Pien wucano got i wi lyel pa lunebi, ka dok wudeyo kom gin ma yam gigero pi po pi jo ma kitgi atir, wuyubo woko onen maber, 	In the same way, on the outside you appear to people as righteous but on the inside you are full of hypocrisy and wickedness.
Lubaŋa pa kwarowa ocero Yecu ma wun wuneko ku wuŋabe i kom yat. 	The God of our ancestors raised Jesus from the dead—whom you killed by hanging him on a cross.
Lubaŋa Wonwa ki Rwot Yecu Kricito omiwu kica ki kuc. 	Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus by the will of God, To God’s holy people in Ephesus, the faithful in Christ Jesus:
nyutwa wel me kadoni 	show us the price of your salt
myero pe icaa ngati mo 	do not despise anybody
kun waco ni, “Adada abimii gum, dok abimiyo likwayu ginya gidoko mapol.” 	saying, “I will surely bless you and give you many descendants.”
nyurro pa muranga yommo cwinynya 	shooting up of the beans pleases me
Doŋ jo ma pud ocuŋ i kom balgi, myero ijukgi i nyim dano ducu, wek omi jo mukene gubed ki lworo. 	Do not entertain an accusation against an elder unless it is brought by two or three witnesses.
Ka piny oyuto, ci ocako a woko ki i Jerucalem. 	When evening came, Jesus and his disciples went out of the city.
nyanynyo lum me yabbo korra yoo 	trampling down the grass in order to make a path
pe ber latin me ngiyo ki odoo 	it it is not good for the child to get used to beaten
Langi pe gipurro ki kweri lagot 	the Langis do not cultivate with an L-shaped handle hoes 
pi wanynye me cammo kic ma omiyo obeddo i nget ot, owekko gionynyo pit macol i wangge 	it is because of yearning for eating honey which made him to sit at the skie of the house, caused the dirty water to be poured upon his face
Aŋeca mo onene kun obedo ka ma mac ocaro	A servant girl saw him seated there in the firelight
Ŋolo kop tye kit man, ceŋ con obino i lobo, ento dano gumaro piny macol makato ceŋ, pien timgi rac. 	For God did not send his Son into the world to condemn the world, but to save the world through him.
Lubaŋa bene omedo cadenne kun tiyo lanyut mogo ki taŋo ki tic madito mapatpat, dok kun poko mot mogo me Cwiny Maleŋ pi mitte kene. 	God also testified to it by signs, wonders and various miracles, and by gifts of the Holy Spirit distributed according to his will.
Okec tikku jony ajonynya pien dongge cele pe cammo gin mo madit 	Okec is very thin because he has very poor appetite, eats very little food
cabun bane tye ma ngwecgi pat pat ma porro kit tic ma gitiyogi kwedde 	soaps also have different smell depending upon the work for which, they are required to do
Dok mon ma giyac gibineno can i kare meno, ki mon ma gidoto litino bene! 	How dreadful it will be in those days for pregnant women and nursing mothers!
nen laticci maber kit twee 	watch carefully the work that this worker does 
tol orwitte woko i gut dyel 	the rope became tightened on the neck of the goat
lem cukari ne wek ibil ka mit mada 	lick the sugar and taste if it is very sweet 
Dano ducu guuro, kun gipenye kekengi ni, “Man lok aŋo? Pien en ciko cen maraco ki twero ki tek, ci gia woko.” 	All the people were amazed and said to each other, “What words these are! With authority and power he gives orders to impure spirits and they come out!”
gwen placita woko ki i wang bur man 	remove the plaster from this ulcer
pe gicoyo kodi dok bene pe gikayo, pe bene gidilo cam i dero, ento Wonwu ma tye i polo pud pitogi. Wun pe piwu tek kato pigi woko? 	Look at the birds of the air; they do not sow or reap or store away in barns, and yet your heavenly Father feeds them
Ento gin gucito guketo lok man omiyo nyiŋe oywek oromo i lobo meno ducu. 	Then he touched their eyes and said, “According to your faith let it be done to you”;
Yecu owaco bot labade otal ni, “A malo icuŋ i dyere.” 	Jesus said to the man with the shriveled hand, “Stand up in front of everyone.”
twon pa omeru pe ipako	you do not praise your brother's bull
Ka dano mo i kinwu waco ni, “An dano pa Paulo,” ki ŋat mukene bene waco ni, “An dano pa Apolo,” meno noŋo pe nyuto ni wun pud wubedo dano adana? 	For when one says, “I follow Paul,” and another, “I follow Apollos,” are you not mere human beings?
An alonnye kena pigi, wek gin bene gilonygi i ada. 	As you sent me into the world, I have sent them into the world.
leggo del ma gitweyo i pyer	to loosen the belt tied around the waist
tuk malo i wii yadi  	flies above the trees
Pien wan gaŋ kalwa madit tye i polo	For, as I have often told you before and now tell you again even with tears, many live as enemies of the cross of Christ.
Wuti gin ma nene wupwonyo, ma wugamo, ma wuwinyo, dok ma wuneno ki bota	Finally, brothers and sisters, whatever is true, whatever is noble, whatever is right, whatever is pure, whatever is lovely, whatever is admirable—if anything is excellent or praiseworthy—think about such things.
okok tin gucammo bonyo mada 	today the egret ate the locusts very much 
ngalla pe konynyo ka pe itye ki gin me 	despising and making fun of other people's things, when you have nothing, is of no use
rum conggi piny ka wek inen maber 	kneel down so that you may see well
Jo meno gin dano me lobo, en mumiyo gin ma giloko obedo me lobo, lobo bene winyogi. 	They are from the world and therefore speak from the viewpoint of the world, and the world listens to them.
wirro tyen leela  	turning the wheel of a bicycle round and round
Wudaŋŋe ki wer me yomcwiny, wun lwak me polo, wun jo maleŋ, wun lukwena ki lutit lok pa Lubaŋa, pien Lubaŋa doŋ odwoko kop ma yam oŋolo i komwu-ni i kome!” 	“Rejoice over her, you heavens! Rejoice, you people of God! Rejoice, apostles and prophets! For God has judged her with the judgment she imposed on you.”
Levi otedo karama madit i ode pi Yecu, lwak lujog-mucoro mapol ki jo mukene gubedo piny i dog cam kacel kwedgi. 	and Levi got up, left everything and followed him.
Ento macalo yam gicoyo, “Gin mogo ma dano pe guneno ki waŋgi, dok bene pe guwinyo ki itgi, gin mogo ma pe donyo i tam pa dano, gin magi en aye gin ma Lubaŋa oyubo pi jo ma mare,” 	However, as it is written: “What no eye has seen, what no ear has heard, and what no human mind has conceived”—the things God has prepared for those who love him—
pien gin ducu gugito but limgi madwoŋ-ŋi aye gubolo, ento en i canne-ni, obolo lim ducu ma tye bote, ma konyo kwone.” 	All these people gave their gifts out of their wealth; but she out of her poverty put in all she had to live on.”
Ento ŋat ma pe oŋeyo, ce otiyo gin ma twero miyo gipwode pire, gibipwode manok. Dano ma gimiye madwoŋ, gibimito madwoŋ ki bote	But the one who does not know and does things deserving punishment will be beaten with few blows
Pi meno, doŋ wubed ma wuyubbe i tamwu, kun wugokke bene. Wuket genwu ducu i kom kica ma bibino botwu i kare ma Yecu Kricito binen iye. 	Even angels long to look into these things.
dyangi gimaarro cammo lum alebu mada	the cattle like very much eating young soft grasses
tyenni twerro rwakke i waar man 	your foot can be pushed into this shoe
kal dong onyur woko pe ben me kwon ento ber me kongo 	the millet has germinated, it is not good for kwon but good for beer
ree yat i wang latin  	apply medicine to the child's eyes
Ento ka wawoto ka maleŋ, macalo en bene tye ka maleŋ, noŋo waribbe ŋat man ki lawote, dok remo pa Wode Yecu Kricito bene lwoko bal ducu woko ki i komwa. 	But if we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have fellowship with one another, and the blood of Jesus, his Son, purifies us from all sin.
dakone pe nywal  	the woman is barren
Watemo gwokke matek wek ŋat mo pe onoŋ bal mo i kit ma watye ka tic kwede ki mot man mabup ma giketo i ciŋwa-ni. 	What is more, he was chosen by the churches to accompany us as we carry the offering, which we administer in order to honor the Lord himself and to show our eagerness to help.
Ento Yecu odok iye botgi ni, “Maa ki omegina gin aye jo ma winyo lok pa Lubaŋa, dok gitiyo.” 	He replied, “My mother and brothers are those who hear God’s word and put it into practice.”
Ento dano acel acel ma winyo lokka ce pe tiyo bibedo calo dano ma lamiŋ ma ogero ode i kom kweyo. 	The rain came down, the streams rose, and the winds blew and beat against that house; yet it did not fall, because it had its foundation on the rock.
Ka i kare me nino madito onoŋo Pilato gonyo lamabuc mo woko ma dano gulege pire. 	Now it was the custom at the festival to release a prisoner whom the people requested.
lakwoo opotto i kulu ci orweny woko, lacen dong opille wa loka tung caa 	the thief fell into the water and disappeared, later he emerged on the other side of the river
En obino i cawa-nu, opwoyo Lubaŋa, otito pi latin-nu bot dano ducu ma yam kuro kare me koko jo Jerucalem. 	Coming up to them at that very moment, she gave thanks to God and spoke about the child to all who were looking forward to the redemption of Jerusalem.
acwiny myerro gicello acella ci beddo mit mada	the liver must be grilled or fried then it will be very tasty
ngomme twiyo anyogi maber mada 	the maize germinates very well in the soil 
Gin ducu ma Won tye kwede mega	He will glorify me because it is from me that he will receive what he will make known to you.
nyodo pe i iye 	she is barren 
kel palaa ma lakke bit 	bring a knife with a sharp edge 
Adula in dok layella twatwal, i aa ki kwene	Adula you are always very troublesome, where have you come from?
tuddo dong woko	to join together against someone
ento gin makulu ka obino, ci gin ma obedo duldul bigik woko. 	but when completeness comes, what is in part disappears.
murre oonyo pien ononggo giputto yerre aputta 	her pubic region has crops of pimples because the hairs were pulled out instead of shaving
Ci Elia ki Moses gucako nen botgi, gubedo ka lok ki Yecu. 	And there appeared before them Elijah and Moses, who were talking with Jesus.
ic ma odeng pe ber 	a big abdomen is not good 
Ka ma gigure iye onoŋo tye poto, i poto meno onoŋo tye iye lyel manyen ka ma yam peya giyiko iye ŋat mo. 	and, as another scripture says, “They will look on the one they have pierced.”
giketto otwol kot i lak goli ma gitweyo i kom tol, ka dong gibollo i pii, ci rec munynyo otwol kot kacel ki goli i dwanne, ci mokko iiye kuno, ka dong giywayo kwedde woko 	the earthworm is fixed to the hook which is attached to a string,then it is cast into the water,the fish then swallows the earthworm together with the hook which get stuck to its throat and so with it the fish is pulled out 
lok man akwilli akwilla i mug pe itit ki gall mo	I am telling you this matter in confidence, do not tell anybody else 
pyem tutwal omiyo lak gweno peke	too much argument made chickens have no teeth
dwan gwara mit mada ka joo ngeyo ma eyo aye gikatto 	gwara it has a lovely sound if blown by the people who know how to blow it
kwar piny 	morning glow 
danone lapaco mewa 	the man is our countryman 
kella lapik wek apik kit yen leela meera 	bring for me the pump so that I may inflate the tyre of my bicycle
atwom ma dakoni onenno ki bot cwarre ma la merro pe wacce 	the suffering that the woman got from her drunkard husband cannot be told
waoo odiko ma ononggo lupwu pud owummo pi ny woko 	we arrived in the morning when the fog was still very thick all over the place
Wora ma tye i polo bene bitimowu kit meno, ka ce pe wutimo kica bot dano ki i cwinywu, dano acel acel ki ominne.”	In anger his master handed him over to the jailers to be tortured, until he should pay back all he owed.
gany oyot oyot 	waddle quickly 
ngat ma dotto lawotte i kom gin ma gutimmo kneel en ladongge aryo 	a person who accuses his companion on what they have done together is a traitor
wamitto ni ingoo ki wan lam maber pien waecitto ka dwar wek wanek lee mapol dok gin mo pe otimwa kuno i dwar 	we want you to bless us because we are going to hunt so that we may kill many animals and nothing should harm us
obutto ni nyany 	he is lying there comfortably 
Dano mo obino, nyiŋe Yairo, ma onoŋo ladit me kacokke. Oryebbe piny ka tyen Yecu, obako doge bote ni obin i ode, 	Then a man named Jairus, a synagogue leader, came and fell at Jesus’ feet, pleading with him to come to his house
twee me karatac megi obeddo maber omiyo pe gurug 	the binding of these sheets of paper was very good, that is why they did not crumble
Guryemo lwak cen mapol, dok guwiro lutwo mapol ki moo kun gicaŋogi. 	They drove out many demons and anointed many sick people with oil and healed them.
joo adii ma twerro ka jalle me citto ka jwerro dye kal pa lapwony? 	how many people will offer themselves to go to cut the grass in the teacher's compound? 
dong gangwa madit ki wor gilorro woko, dano dong donynyo ki i apidig keken 	the main gate at our home is shut at night, the people enter through the small door only
pol oummo lakalatwee woko omiyo pe ginen tin	the stars have been covered by the cloud that is why they are not seen today 
pii malyet tye ka murre i keno 	hot water is warming on the fireplace
ento pi Cwiny Maleŋ Lubaŋa onyuto en obedo Wode i tic matek ma ocere kwede ki i kin jo muto, en aye Yecu Kricito Rwotwa. 	regarding his Son, who as to his earthly life was a descendant of David,
Piŋo wun wutemo i Lubaŋa ma wumito riyo okol mapek i ŋut lupwonynye ma tiŋone oloyo kwarowa kadi wa wan bene? 	Now then, why do you try to test God by putting on the necks of Gentiles a yoke that neither we nor our ancestors have been able to bear?
ka lac myero gilwokko nino ducu 	a place for urine must be washed daily 
nen latin awobi caa ka tye ka tic 	look at or watch the boy there if he is working or doing some work
Jo-nu biero mony i kom Latin romo, ento Latin romo bitayogi woko, pien Rwot pa rwodi, ki Kabaka ma loyo luker ducu, dok jo ma tye bote aye jo ma gilwoŋogi, ma giyerogi ma gin jo ma genne.” 	They will wage war against the Lamb, but the Lamb will triumph over them because he is Lord of lords and King of kings—and with him will be his called, chosen and faithful followers.”
Omiyo mot mo me cwiny pe orem botwu, ma kun pud wutye ka kuro kare me nyuto Rwotwa Yecu Kricito. 	Therefore you do not lack any spiritual gift as you eagerly wait for our Lord Jesus Christ to be revealed.
aa bot Okot	I came from seeing Okot
tic matek me tinggo kicaa pamba kello nyot kom matek mada 	carrying bags of cotton causes great tiredness of the body
Gin maber ma onen boti en aye ni, idag tic pa jo Nikolaiti ma an bene adagi-ni. 	But you have this in your favor: You hate the practices of the Nicolaitans, which I also hate.
yokko tyenne kom ajut	knocks his foot against the stump, or strikes his foot against the stump
Kombeddi atye ka yenyo cwak pa dano, nyo pa Lubaŋa? Gwok nyo atye ka temme me yomo cwiny dano ba? Ka ce nene abedo ka yomo cwiny dano, onoŋo myero pe abed latic pa Kricito. 	As we have already said, so now I say again: If anybody is preaching to you a gospel other than what you accepted, let them be under God’s curse!
pe ipii litino ka lweny 	don't incite the children to fight
Ka doŋ Lubaŋa otyeko keto laticce, okwoŋo cwale botwu pi kelliwu gum ma miyo ŋat acel acel lokke weko timo bal.”	When God raised up his servant, he sent him first to you to bless you by turning each of you from your wicked ways.”
lok ma olokko pe ber 	his speech was not good
lumabuc gilimmo un twatwal 	the prisoners suffered very much from torture
lawil acel mo tin opotto ki yec madit me rue ci ooyo woko piny ingom marac mada 	one buyer today fell down with a heavy load of rice and a lot of the rice poured spilled badly down on the ground 
pe mitto yoggo ma nok cukari ne wek giwill kun man pud tidimo 	he does not want to add some more sugar so that it may be bought because this is still little
odaa gin ki cwaarre omiyo We ka judo 	she is pouting out her lips because she quarrelled with her husband
pii malyet en aye ber me lwok 	warm water is good for washing
rubbo kic ki nyuka kal 	mixing honey with gruel of millet
dakone caar wekko okego ma gubutto kwedde ki cwarre hallo cuka ma pe ketto bongo mukene me geggo okego i wiye 	the woman is careless , she does not put another piece of cloth on top of the sheet to prevent it being soiled by the mucus accompanying spermatozoa
kun wakuro gum ma genwa ocuŋ iye, en aye me neno Yecu Kricito, Lubaŋawa madit ki Lalarwa, ka odwogo ki deyo. 	It teaches us to say “No” to ungodliness and worldly passions, and to live self-controlled, upright and godly lives in this present age,
Lujudaya guŋur i kome pien owaco ni, “An a kwon ma olor piny nia i polo.” 	And this is the will of him who sent me, that I shall lose none of all those he has given me, but raise them up at the last day.
a aa ka tic	I came from work
latinne lacaar nyo lacaarro ki lim  	the child is very extravagant with money
Oyotoyot Yecu ociko lupwonnyene ni gudony i yeya, gukwoŋ nyime me cito loka ca, wa i Betecaida, kun en pud ciko lwak. 	Immediately Jesus made his disciples get into the boat and go on ahead of him to Bethsaida, while he dismissed the crowd.
ngii kace pulle gibecco 	inspect if the groundnuts are good
lak kweri dong tye ka gurre woko 	the edge of the hoe is wearing out
nyakone col ma komme ryen maber mada 	the girl is black with a very beautiful skin
Utmegiwa, wan myero wapwo Lubaŋa jwijwi piwu. Myero wapwoye pien niyewu tye ka doŋo matek twatwal, ki mar ma dano acel acel maro ki lawote bene tye ka medde. 	We ought always to thank God for you, brothers and sisters, and rightly so, because your faith is growing more and more, and the love all of you have for one another is increasing.
Ada, jo ma mito lubo kit pa jo ma lworo Lubaŋa, kun gibedo i Kricito Yecu, gibiunogi, 	You, however, know all about my teaching, my way of life, my purpose, faith, patience, love, endurance,
Iwak dyangi ma ducu tin lekke ning ning? 	how can all these cattle be herded?
ringo ne otop woko opong ki kwkii ma beddo iye ni nyala-nyala 	the meat is rotten and full of weevils and flies' larvae which move about in it
log oyot oyot wek wacitti 	winnow quickly so that we may go
pii ma aa ki i wii ot twerro jolle 	the water that is flowing from the roof of the house can be collected
dok ni, “Rwot ŋeyo ni tam pa luryeko mere gin ma konnye pe.” 	and again, “The Lord knows that the thoughts of the wise are futile.”
lak mucumeni man mitto apakka ka wek ogol gin mo 	the edge of this saw requires to be sharpened so that it may cut anything
Gubino i loka nam tuŋcel, i lobo pa Lugeraca. 	They went across the lake to the region of the Gerasenes.
Pien gin ma balle myero orukke ki gin ma pe balle, ki gin ma to myero orukke ki gin ma pe to. 	For the perishable must clothe itself with the imperishable, and the mortal with immortality.
Awaco lok man kun aye ayeya keken, ento pe aketo macalo cik. 	I say this as a concession, not as a command.
ngaa latin i wii kitanda ka dong irukki 	put the child on her back on the bed and then dress her
Pien nino ducu wan ma wakwo wamine me to pi Yecu, wek omi kwo pa Yecu onen woko ka maleŋ i komwa ma to-ni. 	We always carry around in our body the death of Jesus, so that the life of Jesus may also be revealed in our body.
danone laolle mada, nino ducu kello jami me tukko tukko ma miyo dano nyerro, pe gin mo ma pirre tek 	he is a playful person, always brings things which make people laugh, not serious matters 
Onoŋo gikuro en i dogcel me Damaciko dyeceŋ ki dyewor wek gineke woko	Day and night they kept close watch on the city gates in order to kill him.
nyaanne dong opong  	the girl is now fully grown up and mature
Ka limme doŋ otum ducu, ci kec laparanat matek opoto i lobo meno, awobi-nu ocako mal ata. 	After he had spent everything, there was a severe famine in that whole country, and he began to be in need.
jo mapol i kin Lujudaya onoŋo gubino bot Marita ki Maliam pi kweyo cwinygi pi omingi. 	On his arrival, Jesus found that Lazarus had already been in the tomb for four days.
ojwaat mada ka owinyo lok ma gidotte kwede 	he made a noise with his tongue and lips and wondered about the matter for which he was accused
Pien Lubaŋa oketo dano ducu i mabuc me kwero winyo doge, wek etim kica bot jo ducu. 	so they too have now become disobedient in order that they too may now receive mercy as a result of God’s mercy to you.
Pi remo me to pa Wode ma ocwer piwa, doŋ gikokowa woko, giweko balwa, kit macalo lonyo me kicane dwoŋ kwede, 	to the praise of his glorious grace, which he has freely given us in the One he loves.
ibutto nigning?  	how did you sleep
doggola obutto aperu 	the door was left wide open throughout the night
tit lok pa Lubaŋa, cuŋ iye matek i kare maber ki i kare marac, mi dano guniaŋ maber, jukgi kun idiyo cwinyi i pwony kare ducu. 	In the presence of God and of Christ Jesus, who will judge the living and the dead, and in view of his appearing and his kingdom, I give you this charge:
Ka Petero okato woko i doggaŋ, aŋeca mukene dok onene, ci owaco bot jo ma onoŋo gucuŋ kunnu ni, “Dano man bene onoŋo tye kacel ki Yecu me Najaret.” 	Then he went out to the gateway, where another servant girl saw him and said to the people there, “This fellow was with Jesus of Nazareth.”
“Lujudaya ducu giŋeyo kit kwona nia ka tinona. Pi kwona ducu, cakke i acakkine, abedo i kin rokwa ki i Jerucalem bene. 	“The Jewish people all know the way I have lived ever since I was a child, from the beginning of my life in my own country, and also in Jerusalem.
Ento kare mo obedo pe ma waye ni gulowa, wek wagwok lok ada me kwena maber piwu. 	This matter arose because some false believers had infiltrated our ranks to spy on the freedom we have in Christ Jesus and to make us slaves.
Lok bot jo madoŋo ni gubed jo ma gwokke kengi, jo ma romo awora, jo ma loyo tamgi kengi, jo ma niyegi ki margi tye kakare kun gicuŋ iye matek. 	You, however, must teach what is appropriate to sound doctrine.
pe alego pi lobo, ento pi jo ma ceŋ imiya, pien gin meri. 	I pray for them
Kenyo doŋ apokapoka pe iye i kin Lugrik ki Lujudaya, ŋat ma giliro ki ŋat ma pe giliro, larok ma kwiya piny mere ata ma pe ŋeyo leb, rok ma pud gudoŋ cen i kit me wi lobo, opii, ki ŋat ma doŋ lone kene, pien Kricito doŋ ocoko gin ducu dok bene tye i igi ducu. 	and have put on the new self, which is being renewed in knowledge in the image of its Creator.
Marita ogamo doge ni, “Aŋeyo ni en bicer i cer me nino me agik.” 	Jesus said to her, “Your brother will rise again.”
bao man ducu cenggo pe ber me doggola 	all these planks of wood are short and not good for doors
pe iwek latin obed ka tukko ki lapil pil pa koo pien ngollo cinge woko 	do not leave the child to play with a splinter of bamboo because it will cut his hands
imitto pot karatac adii? 	how many sheets of paper do you want? 
piny dong owaarre 	the weather has cleared up or sky has cleared up
mumiyo gikelo lutwo wa i yo, gipyelogi i wi kitanda ki i wi gibuto, wek ka Petero kato ka ŋetgi, ci tipone owok i kom jo mogo i kingi. 	As a result, people brought the sick into the streets and laid them on beds and mats so that at least Peter’s shadow might fall on some of them as he passed by.
Lwak mony mapol me polo ma guruko boŋo camanini maberre, matar dok maleŋ, gulubo kore ma giriŋo ki aguragura matar. 	The armies of heaven were following him, riding on white horses and dressed in fine linen, white and clean.
wubin wunno con 	do come early 
tye kit lee ma pat pat matino macallo oyoo, ayita ki mukene ki madongo macallo jubi, lyec ki mukene 	there are many varieties of animals, there are small ones like rats, quirrels and big ones like buffaloes and elephants
litino gitye ka kwang i kulo caa nenni moo pe omuny i pii 	the children are swimming in the river there, watch carefully that none of them has drowns in the water
ber pien yabbo um dok kutto woko gin mo ma odonynyo i um 	sneezing is good because it opens up the nose and blows out any foreign body that has entered the nose
En aye wic, ki jo muye en gubedo kome. En obedo acakki, en mukwoŋo cer ki i kin jo muto, wek etel yo i kin jami ducu. 	He is before all things, and in him all things hold together.
Doŋ in lapwony ma ipwonyo jo mukene, pe ipwonnye kekeni bo? Itito lok ni, “Pe ikwal”, in kono ikwalo kwo? 	an instructor of the foolish, a teacher of little children, because you have in the law the embodiment of knowledge and truth—
maar labalagoni 	love your enemy
lacoo man wiye dit mada pe wooro ludito  	this man feels that he is too big and does not respect the elders
rec magitallo pong ki twiny nonggo pe gitallo maber 	smoked fish acts full of beetles' larvae when it is not well smoked
Ento onoŋo gipe ki litino, pien Elicabet yam lalur, gin aryo ducu onoŋo doŋ guti woko. 	But they were childless because Elizabeth was not able to conceive, and they were both very old.
citto ka lillo tyenne maleng	going to clean her legs very clean
owotto ki ooyo nyuka ni pac pac i dye ot 	he went on spilling the porridge along the floor
ento ka ŋat mo obalo, watye ki lakony ma cuŋ piwa bot Lubaŋa Won, en Yecu Kricito ma kite atir. 	But if anybody does sin, we have an advocate with the Father—Jesus Christ, the Righteous One.
piki piki en aye leela ma ringo ki cuma me mac 	motorcycle is a cycle that is rkiden by an engine 
ngan kwon 	i take a handful of kwon in your hand all these cups will break completely if they are left to fall from where they are placed now
Yecu ocako pwonyo lupwonnye mere ni, “Wod pa dano myero olim can madwoŋ, dok ludoŋo ki ajwagi madito pa Lubaŋa ki lupwony-cik myero gukwere woko, ci guneke, ento en cako cer woko i ŋe nino adek.” 	He then began to teach them that the Son of Man must suffer many things and be rejected by the elders, the chief priests and the teachers of the law, and that he must be killed and after three days rise again.
lek dyangi iteergi i puno ka cam 	herd the cattle and take them to graze in the pasture
Abana, amito jo-ni, ma gin mot ma imiya, gibed bota ka ma an atye iye, wek ginen deyo mera ma imiya pi mar meri ma imara kwede ma ocakke ma peya icibo guti me lobo. 	I have given them the glory that you gave me, that they may be one as we are one—
latinne ming twatwal callo dano ma gicenno 	the child is very stupid like a person who has been cursed
ngaa ma owekko odoone kanynyi? 	whose stick has been left here?
Yecu ocako wacogi ni, “Wun wurwenyo pi lok man, pien wukwiya ginacoya, wa tek pa Lubaŋa bene wukwiya. 	Jesus replied, “Are you not in error because you do not know the Scriptures or the power of God?
I kare meno lupwonye pa Jon gubino bot Yecu, gupenye ni, “Piŋo wan kacel ki Luparicayo wari kec, ento lupwonnyeni pe giri kec?” 	But go and learn what this means: ‘I desire mercy, not sacrifice.’ For I have not come to call the righteous, but sinners.”
nget meja  	near the table
Lacen dako-nu bene oto. 	Finally, the woman died too.
ceng malyet miyo kal ran woko 	hot sun stunts the millet stunted 
roc lokke woko  	spoil the case
ragge araga i kom dano 	he forces himself upon the people 
mac twerro mokke kany 	the fire can be lit here
Ento atitti ni, can pa Turo ki Cidon bibedo tworatwora i nino me ŋolo kop, makato can ma bipoto i komi. 	But I tell you, it will be more bearable for Tyre and Sidon on the day of judgment than for you.
ullo cwiny 	the food that he has eaten, has upset him and making him want to vomitnauseating, feeling sick
Waŋeyo ni jami ducu ma giketogi aketa, gubedo ka cur acura ki arem nio wa i kare-ni. 	that the creation itself will be liberated from its bondage to decay and brought into the freedom and glory of the children of God.
dongge maber mada i kare me ninno ducu ento ka oo i kare me pyem dongge ci komme nyogge woko 	at ordinary boxing he is very good but in the time of boxing competition, he becomes very weak 
Wubed ki cwiny ma rom ki cwiny ma yam Kricito Yecu obedo kwede-ni. 	not looking to your own interests but each of you to the interests of the others.
pino cwinynyo dano ni cac 	the wasp stings the people suddenly and effectively
mee gin maber mada, dano myerro gibeddo ma mee tye I kingi 	to love is very good, people should have love among them as they live
Gin ma okir i kin okuto, gin aye jo ma winyo, ento ka kare okato, ci tam mapol, ki lim, ki yomcwiny me kwo man diyogi, nyiggi pe cek maber. 	The seed that fell among thorns stands for those who hear, but as they go on their way they are choked by life’s worries, riches and pleasures, and they do not mature.
Ŋat mo pe otim bal bot ominne, dok pe obwole i lok man	and that in this matter no one should wrong or take advantage of a brother or sister
pi meno latin ma gibinywalo-ni gibilwoŋe Maleŋ, Wod pa Lubaŋa. 	So the holy one to be born will be called the Son of God.
winyo matye ka tuk bene pimme ka i pimmo maber 	even flying birds can be aimed at if you do it well
Dok bene pe akoko can, pien doŋ apwonnye woko ma aŋeyo ni, gin ma atye kwede romma. 	And the God of peace will be with you.
jany i wii kom callo rwot 	sitting on the chair with an air of a chief 
litinno gitukko tuko me gudde ka gidwoggo gang ngat ma giryammo ci giguddu dok cen igec gitukko kit meno nio kwedde wa gang 	children always play the game of being touched the one who has been chased and touched goes behind they play like that up to home
cukke dit mada ma ka kionynyo iye inonggo jami opwodde ata ma kitgi pat pat 	the market is very big, when you enter it, you find plenty of things of different types everywhere
yabbo wang latwoo 	to comfort and to encourage the patient
tok cam ki dano wek gucam 	dish out the food for people to eat
Ajwagi madito pa Lubaŋa pa Lujudaya guwaco bot Pilato ni, “Pe ico ni, ‘Kabaka pa Lujudaya,’ ento ni, ‘Dano man owaco ni, An Kabaka pa Lujudaya.’ ” 	Many of the Jews read this sign, for the place where Jesus was crucified was near the city, and the sign was written in Aramaic, Latin and Greek.
kel latong me barro yen 	bring an axe for splitting the wood
Ka Paulo ocuŋ i dye cokke me Areopago, ci owaco ni, “Wun jo Atene, aniaŋ ni i kit ducu wun ludini mada, 	Paul then stood up in the meeting of the Areopagus and said: “People of Athens! I see that in every way you are very religious.
biyo pii woko ki i bongo ma dyak 	squeezing water out from a wet cloth
awobi ma olet wiye deg ten	the proud youth whose head rejects the pillow
jo ma yee Lubanga gibiminigi gum  	those who believe in God will be blessed
gibineke woko, ento bicer woko i nino me adekke.” Ci gin ducu gukumo matek twatwal. 	When they came together in Galilee, he said to them, “The Son of Man is going to be delivered into the hands of men.
“Dano ma jolowu noŋo ojolo an, ki ma jola noŋo ojolo ŋat ma oora. 	“Anyone who welcomes you welcomes me, and anyone who welcomes me welcomes the one who sent me.
orro kweri ki i kom purre	to remove the hoe from its shaft
gal wiigi pi tutuno 	entertain them for the time being 
lak lyec pe loyo rwode	an elephant is not over burdened by its tusks
ento Woru ma neni i muŋ bimiyi bakacic. 	so that your giving may be in secret
nia koni wuŋeye, doŋ wunene.” 	If you really know me, you will know my Father as well
litino myero gumat nyuka kal wek gubed mateggo 	children must drink a lot of millet porridge so as to be very strong
Wubol tim kwele woko. Bal mukene ducu ma dano timo tye woko, pe gudo kome	Flee from sexual immorality
log cinggi ka dong icit ka cam 	wash your hands and then go to eat 
Pi niye Yakobo bene, ka doŋ to, olamo gum i kom litino pa Yucepu, kun lamo i kom latin acel acel, ma okulo wiye i wi odoo me komone, me woro Lubaŋa. 	By faith Jacob, when he was dying, blessed each of Joseph’s sons, and worshiped as he leaned on the top of his staff.
Meno bimiyo dano keto deyo i nyiŋ Rwotwa Yecu Kricito piwu dok wun bene wubinoŋo deyo pire, pi kica pa Lubaŋawa ki Rwotwa Yecu Kricito.	We pray this so that the name of our Lord Jesus may be glorified in you, and you in him, according to the grace of our God and the Lord Jesus Christ.
kwany kikopo man woko ki i koma	Take this cup from me
tyel lawotti ka tye ki pekko 	support your friend if he has some problem
An cadenne omiyo amoko ni en otiyo tic matek piwu ki pi jo ma tye i Laodikia ki Kerapoli. 	(You have received instructions about him; if he comes to you, welcome him.)
min dyelle komme obeddo akinyo akinyo	the she goat has variegated colour of its skin of black and white 
Cwiny Maleŋ waco atir ni, i kare mo i anyim jo mogo bibwoto niyegi woko, gicako lubo jogi ma gin lugoba, ki pwony pa cen maraco. 	But women will be saved through childbearing—if they continue in faith, love and holiness with propriety.
dano ma wotto twarro aweno woko owekko pe dong wacello mo 	passersby drive away the guinea fowls and so made us not to shoot any
ojayo net lim ma gimiye ni oteer 	he took some part of the money that he was given to him to take
leg tol ma itweyo matek ki donge woko 	loosen the string with which you have tied tightly his hands
tye ka nyatte	he is boasting
Yecu ocako wacogi ni, “Wudwok jami pa Cecar bot Cecar, ki jami pa Lubaŋa wudwok bot Lubaŋa.” Gin gucako urone matek. 	Then Jesus said to them, “Give back to Caesar what is Caesar’s and to God what is God’s.” And they were amazed at him.
En otiyo ki twero pa lee mukwoŋo ca ducu ma lee-nu bene neno, kun miyo lobo kacel ki jo ducu ma gibedo iye woro lee mukwoŋo, ma ret ma i wiye onoŋo doŋ ocaŋ woko-ni. 	It exercised all the authority of the first beast on its behalf, and made the earth and its inhabitants worship the first beast, whose fatal wound had been healed.
dano pe twerro cwee ka pe cammo cam ma mote tye 	a person cannot become fat unless she eats nutritious food 
Luwota ma amaro, pe wuur can ma rom ki mac ma bino i komwu pi temowu, ma kun wutamo ni gwok ca nyo gin mo mapat twatwal mupoto i komwu. 	Each of you should use whatever gift you have received to serve others, as faithful stewards of God’s grace in its various forms.
Meno aye mot ma ŋat ma oloyo binoŋo, ki an abibedo Lubaŋane, en bene bibedo latinna. 	Those who are victorious will inherit all this, and I will be their God and they will be my children.
dok ŋat ma gikano jami mapol bote, gibipenye mapol makato. 	From everyone who has been given much, much will be demanded; and from the one who has been entrusted with much, much more will be asked.
muni umgi okongge, joo macol umgi obab	the Europeans have hooked noses, blacks have flat noses 
Pien Lubaŋa yam pe oweko lumalaika ka gubalo, ento obologi woko piny i bur lyel, ocwalogi i bur ka macol, wek gigwokgi kunnu nio ka kare me ŋolo kop doŋ oromo. 	For if God did not spare angels when they sinned, but sent them to hell, putting them in chains of darkness to be held for judgment;
kun wacce ni, ‘A woko ki i lobowu ki i kin watwu, icit i lobo ma abinyutti.’ 	‘Leave your country and your people,’ God said, ‘and go to the land I will show you.’
agoro poto ikom aribu	Agoro white ants have made their home in an aribu anthill
Man en kwon ma olor piny nia i polo, pe kit kwon ma yam kwariwu gucamo, guto woko	Just as the living Father sent me and I live because of the Father, so the one who feeds on me will live because of me.
Cente omunynyo twerro ngokke ka gilutto ein i dong latin 	the cent coin swallowed by the child can be vomited if a finger is pushed into the child's mouth
kun in iryeyo ciŋi me caŋo dano, wek lanyut ki taŋo mapol otimme i nyiŋ laticci Yecu maleŋ twal.” 	Stretch out your hand to heal and perform signs and wonders through the name of your holy servant Jesus.”
nio wa tin tamgi pud oumme i kite acel-lu ka gikwano botgi gicikke macon, pien laum ca twero kwannye pi Kricito keken. 	But their minds were made dull, for to this day the same veil remains when the old covenant is read
layatane obeddo garo garo 	the potatoes were not well cooked because they were still hard 
gitweye i buc 	he was jailed in prison
litino myerro pe gitukko i wii kot ka tye ka cweer, pien miyo lutkot goyogi woko 	the children should not play in the rain while still raining because they will be struck by it 
mee gin maber mada, dano myerro gibeddo ma mee tye I kingi 	loving is very good, people should have love among them as they live
Omiyo lupwonnyene gupennye kekengi ni, “Ŋatti mo okelle cam?” 	But he said to them, “I have food to eat that you know nothing about.”
latin tye ka curru lac i ot 	the child is passing a large amount of urine in the house
Gupenye ni, “Dano meno ma owacci ni, ‘Kwany gibutoni, iciti-ni’, en aŋa?” 	But he replied, “The man who made me well said to me, ‘Pick up your mat and walk.’ ”
lworro too 	to fearing death
Pi meno abioro botwu lunebi ki luryeko ki lupwony-cik, 	“You snakes! You brood of vipers! How will you escape being condemned to hell?
obot tyen gall okatto kany	someone's footmarks have passed here
pien ka wutimo kit meno, pe wubipoto kadi ki acel. 	For if you do these things, you will never stumble,
Ŋat ma loko pire kene yenyo deyone pire kene, ento ŋat ma yenyo deyo pi ŋat ma oore, dano-nu en me ada, gin ma pe atir pe i iye. 	Anyone who chooses to do the will of God will find out whether my teaching comes from God or whether I speak on my own.
wotto takke 	walks with an affectation 
Ento gin ducu ma yam atamo ni konya, kombeddi doŋ anenogi macalo gin ma konygi pe, pi Kricito. 	as for zeal, persecuting the church; as for righteousness based on the law, faultless.
en coddo dako pa ngadi 	he has frequent sexual affairs with so and so's wife
cit ka lwokke i cadat 	go to wash in the cadat
pun dano mape cammo maber beddo ma ojwer 	a malnourished person has small calves
Akwero jane mewa	Akwero is our slave, that is, she is not born here but bought 
Mot tye ma kitgi patpat, ento Cwiny tye acel. 	There are different kinds of gifts, but the same Spirit distributes them.
En obedo lagen bot Lubaŋa muyero okete i tic, ma rom aroma ki Moses ma yam obedo lagen i ot pa Lubaŋa. 	He was faithful to the one who appointed him, just as Moses was faithful in all God’s house.
min latin cakke geer maber mada 	the breast of the child's mother produces much milk
dano yang giwacci an alur ento kombedi anoggo ic 	sometimes ago people said that I am barren, but now I am pregnant
Luparicayo ma yam lumar lim guwinyo lok man ducu, ci gunyware. 	And if you have not been trustworthy with someone else’s property, who will give you property of your own?
tye ka juggo bonggine macol i pii pi kare moo ka wek okwany cilo woko 	he is soaking his dirty clothes in water first, for sometimes, in order to remove the dirt
wotto luru luru pien laworo omatto kongo matek ma omeer obutto woko i lum, man dong olurro komme woko 	walks sickly and weak because last night he drank so much alcohol, became totally drunk and slept outside in the grass
kel piki piki me citto kwedde i boma 	bring the motorcycle for going to the town
itte otoo 	he is mute 
baone okak woko 	the board is split 
pele pa latin meno owekko gigoye 	for his unruly behaviour and restlessness made her him to be beaten
Jo meno yam bene pe guŋut pi nek ma guneko ki dano, nyo pi timgi me jokjok, kadi pi timo tim tarwaŋ, nyo pi kwalo kwo.	Nor did they repent of their murders, their magic arts, their sexual immorality or their thefts.
nonggo ot 	finding a house 
lumabuc gubakke ki donggi mada ni myerro keg giywee bene i ceng me yweyo pa dano ducuc 	the prisoners pleaded very much, that they should also rest during the public holidays 
danone pengeyo pur maber 	the man does not know how to cultvate well
adong matek i kom it bene tuccu min it woko	boxing hard of the ear also can cause perforation of the eardrum
ci cako goyo lutic luwote, kun camo, mato dok mer kacel ki lumero, 	and he then begins to beat his fellow servants and to eat and drink with drunkards.
ki dako bene kit meno, ka ce oa woko ki bot cware dok ogero laco mukene, ci dako-nu otimo abor.” 	And if she divorces her husband and marries another man, she commits adultery.”
guggo piny tek ki jo ma pyergi lit 	it is very hard kneeling or bending down for those who have backache 
Meno ducu obino pi gin ma wugeno ma gikano i polo piwu, ma yam do? wuwinyo pire con i lok me ada, ma en aye lok me kwena maber 	because we have heard of your faith in Christ Jesus and of the love you have for all God’s people—
pur kwerine otur woko myero dok owil mukene 	his hoe's handle is broken, he should buy another one
Ci Pilipo owacce ni, “Ka iye ki cwinyi ducu ci itwero.” En odok iye ni, “An aye Yecu Kricito, ni en Wod pa Lubaŋa.”] 	Philip said, “If you believe with all your heart, you may.” The eunuch answered, “I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God.”
Ka Pilato owinyo lok man, lworo omedde i kome. 	When Jesus came out wearing the crown of thorns and the purple robe, Pilate said to them, “Here is the man!”
cit ka cwakko laremmi i kot 	go to defend your friend who is in court
Yecu owacce ni, “Omeru bicer.” 	But I know that even now God will give you whatever you ask.”
lok arany ber ki jo mape gupwonynye 	talking without regards to anybody is good only for uneducated people
Luker me wi lobo ducu gutimo kwede abor, kadi wa jo ma bedo i lobo ma gumer ki koŋo vino me tim me aborre-ni.” 	With her the kings of the earth committed adultery, and the inhabitants of the earth were intoxicated with the wine of her adulteries.”
amitto roc me aruka ka wek dong aruk war 	I want socks to put on so that I may wear my shoes
Pien pe amito ni anenwu malomalo, ageno abibedo botwu pi kare malac, ka Rwot oye. 	For I do not want to see you now and make only a passing visit; I hope to spend some time with you, if the Lord permits.
tye ka jwerro dye kal 	is slashing the compound
“Wubineno can, wun lupwony-cik ki Luparicayo, wun lugoba! Pien wulwoko ŋe kikopo ki caani ki woko wek obed leŋ, ento ki igi noŋo gupoŋ ki tim me yako dano ki miti mogo ma pe twero jukke. 	You blind guides! You strain out a gnat but swallow a camel.
cub lee ma riggo caa	spear that animal which is running over there
en aye bititti lok ma bilaro in ki jo ma i odi ducu.’ 	He will bring you a message through which you and all your household will be saved.’
ka owaco botgi ni, “Ada awaco botwu ni, ka pe wulokke wudoko macalo litino, pe wubidonyo i ker me polo wacel. 	And he said: “Truly I tell you, unless you change and become like little children, you will never enter the kingdom of heaven.
Aŋa i kinwu ma nyuto lok me bal i koma ma loya? Ka atito lok me ada, piŋo pe wuye an? 	Yet because I tell the truth, you do not believe me!
Dako oweko agulu piine, ocito i gaŋ, owaco bot dano ni, 	Then Jesus declared, “I, the one speaking to you—I am he.”
aecito woko, in kong ikura kany pi tutuno 	I am going out, in the meantime, wait for me here
pi jwatto ngwec matek twatwal omiyo oloyo kwac pe omakke 	running very first made him escape being caught by the leopard 
cammo gwana meyo kom dano 	eating cassava enervates people
pi meno omiyo kabaka Kerode ocoko ajwagi madito ki lupwony-cik me rokgi ducu, ci openyogi ni, “Kricito mono gibinywalo kwene?” 	When he had called together all the people’s chief priests and teachers of the law, he asked them where the Messiah was to be born.
pe konynyo in me jany ki lok i wii gatti mo ka imititto gin mo ki botte 	it is of no use to speak arrogantly to someone from whom you want something
cok muyembe ma gupotto piny keken gin aye ikelgi paco 	collect only the mangoes that have fallen down and bring them home 
mairo en aye dul me bor ma giyerro me pimmo kwedde bor me lobo nyo gin moo 	mile is a unit of length that has been chosen for measuring distance of land or anything 
tako ka odokko madit twatwal ci deggo aa madit ma gilwonggo ni odec 	when the spleen becomes very big it causes distension of the abdomen which is called odec
latinne pe ngeyo loggo cingge ki wangge	the child does not know how to wash his hands face 
Niyene pe odok cen, pe obedo ka cabbe acaba i tamme i kom cikke pa Lubaŋa, ento niyene omedde ameda odoko matek, kun en miyo deyo bot Lubaŋa, 	Without weakening in his faith, he faced the fact that his body was as good as dead—since he was about a hundred years old—and that Sarah’s womb was also dead.
dakone dok ryanynyo kwon twatwal 	his wife makes very big kwon
goro camo apil	weakness wins a case
ngeye twerro rudde ki cing .	his back can be rubbed with hand
Kit pwoc aŋo muporre ma waromo miyo bot Lubaŋa piwu, ki pi yomcwiny ducu ma wumiyowa ma miyo cwinywa bedo yom i nyim Lubaŋa? 	How can we thank God enough for you in return for all the joy we have in the presence of our God because of you?
latinne dong oputte odonggo odokko awobi 	the child has grown up suddenly to be a boy 
Pe wuti pi cam ma top woko, ento pi cam ma ri nio wa i kwo ma pe tum, ma Wod pa dano bimiyowu	Jesus answered, “Very truly I tell you, you are looking for me, not because you saw the signs I performed but because you ate the loaves and had your fill.
yaarre i wii lyel pa nyekke calo en ma onekko nyekke 	full of happiness during the funeral of her co-wife as if she was the one who killed her
Kwo meno yam onen woko ka maleŋ, wan waneno. Wan do? kombeddi wabedo cadenne, kun watito botwu lok me kwo ma pe tum ma yam obedo bot Won, ka do? onen woko botwa. 	The life appeared; we have seen it and testify to it, and we proclaim to you the eternal life, which was with the Father and has appeared to us.
juk pul imwoddi 	take some groundnuts and eat
ka doŋ gucak pwonyo mon matino me maro coggi ki litinogi, 	Likewise, teach the older women to be reverent in the way they live, not to be slanderers or addicted to much wine, but to teach what is good.
gerre pa tyenne gengge nyonno leela 	his being bow legged prevents him from riding bicycle
Doŋ ka waŋeyo ni en winyo legawa, waŋeyo ni doŋ watyeko noŋo gin ma walego bote. 	And if we know that he hears us—whatever we ask—we know that we have what we asked of him.
ocok man ki byene	each ocok plant grows on its own ant-hill
wanynyo pok labolo  	removing the thick skin of banana
orudi wotto alwak alwak 	wolves move about in groups as packs as wolves
Ci lupwonnye gubino guwacce ni, “Iŋeyo ni Luparicayo cwinygi ocwer twatwal i kare ma guwinyo lok ma in iwaco?” 	What goes into someone’s mouth does not defile them, but what comes out of their mouth, that is what defiles them.”
I kare ma lwak ducu winyo lokke, Yecu owaco bot lupwonnyene ni, 	While all the people were listening, Jesus said to his disciples,
“Cik ki lunebi obedo tye nio wa i kare pa Jon	What people value highly is detestable in God’s sight.
miri en aye ghetto kwede nyo giteddo kwede 	charcoal is used for forging and for cooking
Yecu odok iye bote ni, “Ada, awacci ni, tin wabibedo kwedi i Paradic.” 	Jesus answered him, “Truly I tell you, today you will be with me in paradise.”
pe ber ka jwiyo dano 	it is not good to be hissing at people 
atuna wang gwok 	painful swellings on the eyelids 
piny cwir 	rainy season 
latinne dok itte obeddo pakapaka callo it olik 	the child has very large ears like those of bats, bat ears
ngaa matye ka maddo dako ma onywalli? 	who is swabbing the woman who has just delivered? 
wabeddo ka mat wan kwedde man dong aballe woko ki mat, matto dong katta woko dok ki ngatti mo keken	I have ruined him, we used to drink together but now he drinks too much more than me and with anybody
Wubineno can, wun lupwony-cik, pien wumayo layab me ŋeyo piny woko, kun wun kikomwu pe wudonyo iye, dok wugeŋo dano ma mito donyo iye bene.” 	When Jesus went outside, the Pharisees and the teachers of the law began to oppose him fiercely and to besiege him with questions,
dakoni pud tye ka cotto lok botwa caa 	the woman is still speaking scornfully to us here 
anyira laworo gugoyo adugu mada	the girls yesterday played very much adugu
lok ma gimeddo amedda nen woko kama leg 	the words that have been added can easily be seen
Gin aŋo doki? Dok watimu bal, pi te lokke ni wan pe watye i te cik ento i te kica? Pe kumeno gire! 	For sin shall no longer be your master, because you are not under the law, but under grace.
Yecu odokke iye ni, “Ka pe wuneno lanyut ki taŋo, ci pe wubiye kadi matidi mo.” 	When this man heard that Jesus had arrived in Galilee from Judea, he went to him and begged him to come and heal his son, who was close to death.
ento ka dano ma kate ki tek olwenyo i kome ce oloye, bicoko jami lwennye ma ya en geno, bipoko jami ma yam en oyako ki bote. 	But when someone stronger attacks and overpowers him, he takes away the armor in which the man trusted and divides up his plunder.
ka guo ci gucito i kacokke pa Lujudaya. 	On arriving there, they went to the Jewish synagogue.
Yecu ocako wacce ni “Doŋ iciti, niyeni ocaŋi.” Ocako neno piny cut, ci olubo kor Yecu kun woto kwede i yo.	“Go,” said Jesus, “your faith has healed you.” Immediately he received his sight and followed Jesus along the road.
umme oding  	his nose is blocked (usually this is due to cold in the head)
gitye ka totto kic	they are gathering honey
mukwoŋo koŋ wumer wuribbe ki omeru, ka lacen doŋ idwogi ityer motti. 	First go and be reconciled to them; then come and offer your gift.
obeddo ka perro lok owekko dek owang woko i keno 	she was talking too much and left the food which she was cooking to burn
en pe ngeyo wot ki karakap 	he does not know how to walk with wooden clogs 
ki kit ma ajwagi madito pa Lubaŋa ki lulocwa gudobe wek giŋol kop i kome me neke, gugure i kom yataria. 	One of them, named Cleopas, asked him, “Are you the only one visiting Jerusalem who does not know the things that have happened there in these days?”
Dano maber kwanyo gin maber ki i kin jamine mabeco ma en okano, dano marac kwanyo gin marac ki i gin maraco ma en okano. 	You brood of vipers, how can you who are evil say anything good? For the mouth speaks what the heart is full of.
otira laworo oyeggo piny mada, owekko agulo ma pe gilwobbo maber, gupotto piny, gutoo woko i ganggi mogo 	there was a severe earthquake yesterday which made pots that were not properly piled to fall down and brake in some homes
ledde ki lok ma teerre pekke pe konynyi 	speaking always on meaningless matters does not help you 
Ka doŋ onoŋo, ci lwoŋo lureme ki luwote kacel, kun waco botgi ni, ‘Cwinywu obed yom kacel kweda, pien doŋ anoŋo ciliŋ-ŋa ma onoŋo orwenyo-ni.’ 	And when she finds it, she calls her friends and neighbors together and says, ‘Rejoice with me; I have found my lost coin.’
Myero wacul mucoro bot Cecar nyo pe?” 	Is it right for us to pay taxes to Caesar or not?”
amayo gweno woko ki i dong ogwang 	I saved the chicken from the mouth of the carnivore
Doŋ ka wucamo cam nyo ka wumato mat, nyo gin ducu ma wutiyo, wutim ducu pi miyo deyo bot Lubaŋa. 	So whether you eat or drink or whatever you do, do it all for the glory of God.
cit wunu ka jwayo tatnk woko matye i ot teddoni 	go to wipe clean the soot which is in the kitchen
pien pe tye lok pa lanebi mo ma yam obino pi mit pa dano, ento Cwiny Maleŋ aye mumiyo dano guloko lok ma oa ki bot Lubaŋa.	For prophecy never had its origin in the human will, but prophets, though human, spoke from God as they were carried along by the Holy Spirit.
En mumiyo wadoko lukwena, luwaŋ Kricito	Though we once regarded Christ in this way, we do so no longer.
oryamme nono ki i tic pien pe eballo gin mo 	he dismissed him for nothing because he did not make a mistake or spoil anything
Yecu owacce ni, “An abino i lobo ka ŋolo kop, wek jo ma pe neno piny gunen, jo ma neno gudok luwaŋoto.” 	Jesus said, “You have now seen him; in fact, he is the one speaking with you.”
Yecu ocako a ki kunnu, ocito wa i lobo ma tye cok ki Turo ki Cidon. Ci odonyo i ot mo kunnu	Jesus left that place and went to the vicinity of Tyre
kom dyang man beddi ryang ryang 	the cow is very fat with a shining body 
Meno ducu yam otimme i komgi macalo lapo wic, ka doŋ gicoyo me cikowa, wan jo ma agikki piny oo i komwa-ni. 	These things happened to them as examples and were written down as warnings for us, on whom the culmination of the ages has come.
“I kare ma Wod pa dano bidwogo ki deyo kacel ki lumalaikane ducu, ci en bibedo i wi komkerre me deyo. 	“When the Son of Man comes in his glory, and all the angels with him, he will sit on his glorious throne.
Ka ce dano mo ma pe oye Lubaŋa olwoŋowu ka cam, kun wumito wucit wucam, ka wuo i gaŋŋe wucam gin ducu ma giketo i nyimwu, pe wubed ka penyo gin mo iye pi lworo bal. 	If an unbeliever invites you to a meal and you want to go, eat whatever is put before you without raising questions of conscience.
Yucepu bene oa ki i Galilaya, ki i gaŋ me Najaret, ocito i Judaya, i gaŋ pa Daudi ma gilwoŋo Beterekem, pien en yam ŋat acel i kin likwayo pa Daudi, 	So Joseph also went up from the town of Nazareth in Galilee to Judea, to Bethlehem the town of David, because he belonged to the house and line of David.
Yecu owaco botgi ni, “Man aye remona me gicikke ma ocwer pi jo mapol. 	“This is my blood of the covenant, which is poured out for many,” he said to them.
ogwal pye ni ryac 	the frog jumps a long distance
wuyub yo ma tyenwu lubo ocuŋ atir, wek ŋat ma tyene oŋol pe dok tyene oputte woko liweŋ ki i waŋ mwot, ento myero ocaŋ woko acaŋa. 	“Make level paths for your feet,” so that the lame may not be disabled, but rather healed.
ka gonne i kingi kengi kuno 	they are telling off each other for telling lies 
gucitto ka dwar i tim 	they went to hunt in the jungle 
Ka ma pe gijolowu iye, ka wua ki i gaŋ meno, wuteŋ apwa tyenwu obed caden botgi.” 	If people do not welcome you, leave their town and shake the dust off your feet as a testimony against them.”
Doŋ ka ŋat mo ogedo i wi te guti mukwoŋo-nu ki jabu nyo ryal, nyo godi me wel-gu, nyo yat nyo lum, nyo reŋ kal, 	If anyone builds on this foundation using gold, silver, costly stones, wood, hay or straw,
wun wuwaco bot ŋat ma Won olonyo, oore i lobo, ni, ‘Iyeto lubaŋa,’ pien an awaco ni, ‘An Wod pa Lubaŋa’? 	If he called them ‘gods,’ to whom the word of God came—and Scripture cannot be set aside—
ci owacca ni, ‘Paulo, pe ibed ki lworo. In myero icuŋ i nyim Cecar	and said, ‘Do not be afraid, Paul
guurro dek ki ongwec 	to mash cowpeas with a pestle
macalo oloko bot kwariwa, bot Abraim ki bot likwaye matwal.” 	to Abraham and his descendants forever, just as he promised our ancestors.”
dano myero gulwor twee i jero	people should be afraid of being imprisoned in the jail 
makko goba pa minne 	to inherit the habit of lying of his mother
Rwot odokke iye ni, “Wun lubuta! Ŋat acel acel ki i kinwu pe gonyo twonne nyo kanane ki i ka-camgi, ci tero i pii i ceŋ cabit. 	The Lord answered him, “You hypocrites! Doesn’t each of you on the Sabbath untie your ox or donkey from the stall and lead it out to give it water?
kadone were-were 	the salt is very nice and palatable
Pien jo ma tiyo gin maber pe gibedo ki lworo mo i kom luloc, ento jo ma tiyo gin marac aye gibedo ki lworo. 	But concerning Israel he says, “All day long I have held out my hands to a disobedient and obstinate people.”
tye lakalatwe acel ma ryeny mataar ma nen mere ki odiko con 	there is one star which is very bright and appears only in the morning
lok mo ma tidi mamwa ducu wangge jinynye iye woko	even for a very small matter his eyes are screwed about it 
Yecu ooro Petero ki Jon, kun cikogi ni, “Wucit wuyub cam me Kato piwa, wek wacam.” 	Jesus sent Peter and John, saying, “Go and make preparations for us to eat the Passover.”
pe ijwii dano ataata mape ingeyo 	do not go on hissing to all other people whom you don't know
ci doŋ wuruko dano manyen ma Lacwec tye ka rocone i ŋec manyen me dwoko i calle kikome. 	Do not lie to each other, since you have taken off your old self with its practices
ento gicoyo pi wan bene. Wan bene gibikwanowa ni kitwa atir, wan jo ma doŋ waye Lubaŋa ma yam ocero Rwotwa Yecu Kricito ki i kin jo muto-ni, 	The words “it was credited to him” were written not for him alone,
Anac ki Kayapa aye onoŋo gin ajwagi madito pa Lubaŋa. I kare meno lok pa Lubaŋa obino bot Jon wod pa Jekaria i tim. 	during the high-priesthood of Annas and Caiaphas, the word of God came to John son of Zechariah in the wilderness.
olokko atyer ma dano ducu guwinynyo 	he spoke openly and frankly and all the people heard
“Bot lamalaika pa lwak muye an ma gitye i Cumurna co kit man ni, “ ‘Man lok pa ŋat mubedo mukwoŋo ki me agikkine, ŋat ma yam oto ka dok ocer woko odoko kwo-ni. 	“To the angel of the church in Smyrna write: These are the words of him who is the First and the Last, who died and came to life again.
Pol ocako bino ci tipone oumo komgi woko lipuk, ci dwan owinnye ki i pol, ma wacci, “Man aye Woda ma amaro	Then a cloud appeared and covered them, and a voice came from the cloud: “This is my Son, whom I love
dwog tunggi 	come this side 
Pien ŋolo kop pe timo kica bot ŋat ma yam pe otimo kica	because judgment without mercy will be shown to anyone who has not been merciful
I kare meno lwak jo Atene ducu ki welo ma gibedo kunnu gityeko karegi ducu ka tito lok ki winyo lok i kom gin manyen. 	(All the Athenians and the foreigners who lived there spent their time doing nothing but talking about and listening to the latest ideas.)
yaarro kweyo, kal, ki nyim  	spreading out sand, millet and simsim
Dogcel adek onoŋo tye yo tuŋ wokceŋ, yo tuŋ acam dogcel adek, yo tuŋ acuc dogcel adek, ki yo tuŋ potoceŋ bene dogcel adek. 	There were three gates on the east, three on the north, three on the south and three on the west.
gibollo tonggi en aye ginyaa kwedde pe ginywal anywalla  	they lay eggs and not give birth and that is how they multiply
mak kwo ma pe tum matek ma yam gilwoŋi iye i kare ma ituco niyeni i nyim lucaden mapol ata. 	Fight the good fight of the faith
puggo dong bege tek mada	to close the bank's door is very difficult
can me cukari dong tye kany matek mada 	there is severe shortage of sugar here
dyegi magi gitwerro Iwobbe i bar kwica 	these goats can be tied in the field there
ngat ma Boone dong paco, noggo gicitto ka dwar, goggo lalworro	the gruel has become watery
Ento ka kitwa ma pe atir nyuto kit ma atir ma Lubaŋa tye kwede, ci wan dok wabiwaco lok aŋo? Wabiwaco ni Lubaŋa pe kite atir pi keto akemone i komwa? (Man atye ka lok i kit pa dano.) 	What if some were unfaithful? Will their unfaithfulness nullify God’s faithfulness?
wangge nigge kene pi caa ducu, kitte dong eno 	one of his eyes always closed, it is like that all the time
Mene mayot makato, me waco ni, ‘Balli doŋ giweko’, nyo ni, ‘A, iwoti’? 	Knowing their thoughts, Jesus said, “Why do you entertain evil thoughts in your hearts?
cit icipak lak lyedi man 	go and sharpen the razor 
Muŋ me dini ma watuco pire dit twatwal: Yam onyutte i kom, gikwane ni kite atir pi Cwiny Maleŋ, lumalaika gunene, gitito pire bot lurok, giye en i lobo ducu, ka doŋ gitero woko malo i deyo.	if I am delayed, you will know how people ought to conduct themselves in God’s household, which is the church of the living God, the pillar and foundation of the truth.
wok pe ber 	a gap in the teeth is not good
en puk con mada ka citto katic 	he rises very early to go to work 
Ŋat mulor piny en acel-lu bene aye oito malo ka mabor i ŋe polo ducu, wek epoŋ jami ducu woko liweŋ.	(What does “he ascended” mean except that he also descended to the lower, earthly regions?
motto dano yoo mape ingeyogi pe ber	to greet people in the street whom you don't know is not good
ringo ma okwok kon gijiyo ka dong gitallo 	bad meat is partially cooked first and then it is smoked dry
ococ en aye lee matye ki okutto ma orummo komme woko, ma ka gimitto makke ci illogi male okutone gibocco mada ma ka inyonno ci cubbi marac twatwal 	it is an animal which has long needle like structures called quills, all over its body, which rise and stand erect the guilts are quite long, which if one stepped on, can be badly pierced
myero iling ni tik 	you should keep completely silent
kare puddi peya owec ki botta 	I have not yet found a suitable opportunity or there is still no suitable opportunity for me
ki jeme jeme ma kot opwoddo mada 	he came with his clothes dripping all over with water because it rained very much on him 
ruk latin ki bongo maleng 	dress the child in a clean dress 
ngat mukene 	another one or another person 
kella citam me bollo waraga 	bring for me the stamp for posting the letters 
pimmo lee ki luduku 	aiming at the animal with the gun
leyo cing i tee agulu pii ma pii opong iye wek inen Ica gin mo opotto iye 	dipping your hand in the water in the pot and to find out whether there is something
Pe wutam ni abidotowu bot Won	How can you believe since you accept glory from one another but do not seek the glory that comes from the only God?
Utmegiwa ducu ma gitye kacel kweda kany bene gumotowu. Bot jo ducu ma guye Kricito ma gibedo i Galatia: 	Paul, an apostle—sent not from men nor by a man, but by Jesus Christ and God the Father, who raised him from the dead—
kwot pa tako as pi two tyen mapol me maleriya 	the enlargement of the spleen arises as a result of frequent infections of malaria 
Gubedo ka winyo nio wa i lok man	The crowd listened to Paul until he said this
Ento an pe anoŋo otimo gin mo ma romo miyo giŋolle kop me to. Doŋ macalo en aye gire okoko apil pi laloc madit, an bene amoko ni abicwale. 	I found he had done nothing deserving of death, but because he made his appeal to the Emperor I decided to send him to Rome.
Utmegiwa, pe wuol ka tiyo gin maber. 	And as for you, brothers and sisters, never tire of doing what is good.
Ka ce gimito ŋeyo lok mo, myero gupeny coggi ki paco. Bedo me lewic mada, dako me lok i cokke pa lwak dano ma guye Kricito. 	If they want to inquire about something, they should ask their own husbands at home; for it is disgraceful for a woman to speak in the church.
jutto ki odoo tyen adek  	to strike striking with a big stick three times
Dok bene i kare ma okelo latin kayo i lobo en owaco ni, “Lumalaika pa Lubaŋa ducu myero guwore.” 	And again, when God brings his firstborn into the world, he says, “Let all God’s angels worship him.”
ummo wii agulu ki ngoo 	with what does he cover the pot? 
Ci jo ducu ma guwinyo lokke guuro, kun giwaco ni, “Man pe en aye laco ma yam omito tyeko jo ma gikwoŋo nyiŋ man i Jerucalem-mi? Dok en bene obino kany pi lok meno, pi tweyo dano wek etergi bot ajwagi madito.” 	All those who heard him were astonished and asked, “Isn’t he the man who raised havoc in Jerusalem among those who call on this name? And hasn’t he come here to take them as prisoners to the chief priests?”
wek ka ilubo lokgi wek ilweny lweny maber, kun imako niye matek ma ii leŋ. Pi kwero tam ma i igi ma nyuto botgi balgi, jo mogo niyegi oballe woko. 	Timothy, my son, I am giving you this command in keeping with the prophecies once made about you, so that by recalling them you may fight the battle well,
Pe acoyo botwu waraga man pien ni wukwiya lok me ada, ento pien wuŋeyo, dok wuniaŋ bene ni, pe tye goba mo ma oa i lok ada. 	I do not write to you because you do not know the truth, but because you do know it and because no lie comes from the truth.
Yecu ka oŋeyo pyem ma i cwinygi, okwanyo latin matidi, omiye ocuŋ i ŋete, 	Jesus, knowing their thoughts, took a little child and had him stand beside him.
ka iye lok me tal ci makki, ento ka pe iye ci pe timmi gin mo, kadi ngatti wacci etalli 	if you do not believe in charming or casting spell on somebody, it does not affect you, but if you believe in it then you are affected
dano ma Iwor myerro pe beddo i kin dano 	a coward should not be among the people
Gubako doggi bot Yecu ni myero oa woko ki i lobo tugi. 	Then the people began to plead with Jesus to leave their region.
ngomme ber mada nyim aa iye maber mada	the land is very fertile, simsim grows very well in it
Owaco bot lamalaika me abicel ma tye ki tum-mi ni, “Gony lumalaika aŋwen ma gitweyogi i dog kulu madit me Euprate-ni woko.” 	It said to the sixth angel who had the trumpet, “Release the four angels who are bound at the great river Euphrates.”
Luindi gimaarro mada tung amuka pien gitammoni miyo kom coo tek me beddo ki mon 	the Indians like very much rhinoceros horns because they believe that it has aphrodisiac properties and gives them power to sleep well with women
wooro ludito gin maber  	respecting the elderly is a good thing
Pien tye ka mo ka ma yam en oloko i kom nino me abiro ni meno, “Lubaŋa oywe i nino me abiro ki i kom ticce ducu.” 	For somewhere he has spoken about the seventh day in these words: “On the seventh day God rested from all his works.”
ogodo um 	dry crusts from the infected nose
Ludoŋo ma loyo loc maber myero giworgi twatwal, makato myero giwor jo ma tye ka yelle ka tito lok ki pwonyo dano. 	If any woman who is a believer has widows in her care, she should continue to help them and not let the church be burdened with them, so that the church can help those widows who are really in need.
An ma koma kec kuman-ni, aŋa ma bilara ki i kom man ma to woko-ni? 	but I see another law at work in me, waging war against the law of my mind and making me a prisoner of the law of sin at work within me.
tok ringo matye i agulo caa ikel bene gicam 	dish the meat in that pot and bring it also to be eaten
kun gipenyo peny bene ni, “Cikke me dwogone ma gitito pire-ni tye kwene? Pien cakke ma kwarowa guto woko, jami ducu tye i kit ma yam gitye kwede i acakki keto lobo.” 	They will say, “Where is this ‘coming’ he promised? Ever since our ancestors died, everything goes on as it has since the beginning of creation.”
dano tin gitye ka myello myel gara 	today the people are dancing the rattles dance, that is, with the rattles tied on their legs
cit oyot oyot ka ommo lim ki i bege ma nonggo pud peya gilorro 	go quickly to the bank to draw some money before it is closed
rweny ki nyinge 	forgets his name 
nyakone dong opong  	the girl is now fully grown up and mature
moono lok mung pa lawotti pe ber	divulging the secrets of your friend is very bad
Pe awaco ni jo mukene gubed maber, wun aye can odiwu, ento ni dano ducu gubed maromrom. 	For if the willingness is there, the gift is acceptable according to what one has, not according to what one does not have.
wangge col 	he is unfriendly and has cold look 
titta baa 	please explain to me 
cittu wumonygi 	go and attack them 
In latic wadwa me ada bene, alegi ikony mon man ba, pien gin bene gulwenyo kacel kweda pi lok me kwena maber kacel ki Kelemente bene ki lutic wadiwa mukene ducu, ma doŋ gityeko coyo nyiŋgi woko i buk me kwo. 	I plead with Euodia and I plead with Syntyche to be of the same mind in the Lord.
yadine ojwaar mabecco matek me geddo nyo me jami i ot 	the trees have grown very tall and fine, suitable for building and making house furniture
ka doŋ ibin icak lubo kora.” 	Then come, follow me.”
pe ipoo ni nenne warwatte kweddi i London? 	don't you remember that we met in London sometime ago? 
odaŋŋe ki dwan maloŋo ni, 	He cried out at the top of his voice,
leggo pi timmo kica 	begging for forgiveness
tye ka pido i kot pi lawotte 	he is pleading in court for his friend
kel piki piki me citto kwedde i boma 	bring the motorcycle for going to the town
bur tye i daan latin 	there is an ulcer in the child's palate
Rwot myero otel cwinywu nio wa i mar pa Lubaŋa ki i diyo cwiny ma a ki bot Kricito. 	May the Lord direct your hearts into God’s love and Christ’s perseverance.
yamo tanynyo wii dero woko 	the wind blows otf the grass from the root of a granary
potto cim 	he has an epilepsy or he suffers from epilepsy 
dano abic ma gilyerrogi latin tye ka lyerre 	the child is swinging 
Rok ducu bicokke kacel i nyime, en bipoko kingi woko patpat, kit macalo lakwat poko kwede romi ki i kom dyegi. 	All the nations will be gathered before him, and he will separate the people one from another as a shepherd separates the sheep from the goats.
won leela ni tye kwene? 	where is the owner of the bicycle
kare ki kare potto ka gweyo odilo ci yuyu congge doki pwacco bene 	now and then he falls during football game and his knees get abraded and lacerated
ka doŋ gutyeko neno utmego, ci gucuko cwinygi, ka gucito.	Then they left.
Ka gutimo kit meno, ci gumako lwak rec mapol ata, obwogi ocako cot. 	When he had finished speaking, he said to Simon, “Put out into deep water, and let down the nets for a catch.”
Kit meno Wora ma tye i polo bene pe mito ni ŋat mo acel i kin jo magi matino myero oto. 	In the same way your Father in heaven is not willing that any of these little ones should perish.
wii dako oteng woko i kom cwaare 	the wife has become disobedient to her husband
layata otirri woko dag cek 	the potato has become hard, it cannot be cooked soft
litino myerro ginyommo anyira ma mwonynya kitmeno 	children should mary good looking and intelligent girls like that one
Ento pe guniaŋ lok ma en oloko botgi. 	But they did not understand what he was saying to them.
kongo lacoyi gionynyo i abino ka dong gimatto ki oceke	the millet beer is put into the pitcher and then it is sucked with a stick pipe
guddo tong wang ki cing pe ber 	touching the eyeball with finger is not good 
bongone twero yarre i wii tol ci twee iye 	the cloth can be spread on the string to dry there
tye ka tunno jamine i cuk 	she is selling in the market
Luparicayo mogo ma cok kwede guwinyo lok man. Gupenye ni, “Wan bene waŋwa oto?” 	Jesus said, “For judgment I have come into this world, so that the blind will see and those who see will become blind.”
amitto cati ma lac korre inci pyeragwen wiye aryo 	I want a shirt of chest size forty two inches
apurro poto me ature keken 	wind blows and stirs up dust 
wel me willo guniya me kado ni adii? 	what is the total price of buying the sack of salt? 
yat man lyakke olot oo wa i kom ot 	the roots of this tree have grown up to the house
Ci Yecu ogerre i wi cen, cen oa woko ki i kome, cutcut awobi-ni ocaŋ woko i cawa meno. 	“You unbelieving and perverse generation,” Jesus replied, “how long shall I stay with you? How long shall I put up with you? Bring the boy here to me.”
ribbo yoo kwedde 	to come together with him
man cal pa min jwinya ma iye dong Wel ki tonne, jwinya nino ducu tonne flow kl iiye ma nogo en tye i tee del nyig tyen ka lacen dong bollo gi woko 	this is the picture of a female jigger with its abdomen distended with its egg
pyerre otuk woko 	he sprained his back 
dano acel acel tye ki mocce ma en dagge kwedde ka otimmo gin mo  	each person has special words which he shouts for joy when he has done some thing
papai ka ocek twatwal ci licce woko 	when papaw is too ripe, it becomes too soft and watery
wolle rac mada 	poisoning is very bad 
twoo otel tok nekko dano oyot oyot mada, kobo bene ki yamo 	this is a very serious infectious disease which starts with fever, severe headache and later stiffness of neck
rabbo tok gang 	passing on the outskirt of the village 
Dok en kikome bene obedo gitum pi kwanyo balwa, pe balwa keken ento kadi wa bal pa jo ma i wi lobo ducu. 	He is the atoning sacrifice for our sins, and not only for ours but also for the sins of the whole world.
aleggi ni itimma 	I request you to forgive me
owitto wiye woko oyot, kono kidi ocello wiye 	he turned his head away in time otherwise the stone would have struck his head
kit timme meeri atata twerro ngommo wii litino woko 	your type of behaviour can easily mislead the children
gin ni cok en do twerro gudde mere 	the thing is near here it can be easily touched
rokko oyoo ki i ococce wek okat woko 	pushing a stick into the rat's hole to make it come out
Lutic pa won ot gucito bot won ot gupenye ni, ‘Ladit, yam onoŋo pe icoyo kodi mabeco i potoni? Piŋo dok waneno doo tye iye?’ 	“The owner’s servants came to him and said, ‘Sir, didn’t you sow good seed in your field? Where then did the weeds come from?’
wol congge 	knee joint
otwoo twatwal ma lebbe dong opuune woko ki gin matar 	he is so ill that his tounge is now furred puyo
dyangi tye ma gupec kany mada  	the cattle are in plenty here
gwek ringo iye aryo 	divide the meat into two portions
Doŋ wuleg kit man ni, ‘Wonwa ma tye i polo, giwor nyiŋi maleŋ. 	Do not be like them, for your Father knows what you need before you ask him.
Dano acel acel myero koŋ okwoŋ ŋine kene, ka doŋ ocak camo mugati meno ki mato gin ma tye i kikopo meno. 	Everyone ought to examine themselves before they eat of the bread and drink from the cup.
Ka icito bot laŋolkop kun inywako yo ki ŋat ma doti, tem matek me yubo lok kwede ma kun pud wutye i yo, wek pe oteri i nyim laŋolkop, laŋolkop owek miyi bot askari, askari owek teri i mabuc. 	As you are going with your adversary to the magistrate, try hard to be reconciled on the way, or your adversary may drag you off to the judge, and the judge turn you over to the officer, and the officer throw you into prison.
nyello dong bao wek orom doggola 	to trim the edge of the board so that it can fit the door
dano mogo gullo Iaa twatwal 	some people do spit very much
Wun wego bene, pe myero wuket kolo i kom litinowu, miyo cwinygi balle woko. 	Children, obey your parents in everything, for this pleases the Lord.
latin obinno ma bongone opong ki labika keken  	the child came with the clothes full of labika stuck to them
Owoto obaro i Ciria ki Cilicia kun miyo tekcwiny bot lwak muye Kricito.	He went through Syria and Cilicia, strengthening the churches.
ged nyuka ki litino 	prepare a lot of gruel for the children
gibiŋale, gibitimo aranyi i kome, gibiŋulo laa i kome	They will mock him, insult him and spit on him;
gin ma otwodde 	a circular thing 
dok gek makko twatwal 	the man gets too frequent attacks of hiccoughs
tuc bal meeri 	confess your sin 
pien tin myero abed i odi.” 	I must stay at your house today.”
lok ma ilokkoni wanggo cwinygi mada  	what you said annoyed them very much
Meno Rwot aye ma owaco ma omiyo lok meno oŋene nia wa con.’ 	things known from long ago.
Kadi bed kumeno, ŋat mucoyo kodi nyo ŋat ma oonyo iye pii, gin ducu pe gin mo, kono Lubaŋa keken aye ma miyo jami doŋo. 	So neither the one who plants nor the one who waters is anything, but only God, who makes things grow.
ka ma kwarowu guomo iye cwinya, gutema bene iye, kun gibedo ka neno ticca pi mwaka pyeraŋwen kulu. 	where your ancestors tested and tried me, though for forty years they saw what I did.
gwad lobo woko ki i wang it 	remove the mud from the well
Man aye ma miyo Cwiny Maleŋ nyuto ka maleŋ ni, yo me donyo i kabedo maleŋ peya giyabo ka kema mukwoŋo ma woko ca pud ocuŋ. 	The Holy Spirit was showing by this that the way into the Most Holy Place had not yet been disclosed as long as the first tabernacle was still functioning.
Jon otito lok me caden i kome ni, “Ceŋ aneno Cwiny Maleŋ kun bino nia ki i polo macalo amam, opye, obedo i kome. 	I myself did not know him, but the reason I came baptizing with water was that he might be revealed to Israel.”
kel odwel wek dano gubed iye 	bring the hide for the people to sit on
Pien onoŋo guloko ni, “Pe gimak i nino madito, miyo lwak bitugge.” 	“But not during the festival,” they said, “or the people may riot.”
pien wuŋeyo ni temo niyewu miyo wudiyo cwinywu. 	because you know that the testing of your faith produces perseverance.
janynyo wang 	to open the eyes widely 
dim lok 	to get involved in a case
potto i bal  	falling into sin
Lurema, ka Lubaŋa doŋ omarowa kit man, wan bene myero wamarre kekenwa. 	Dear friends, since God so loved us, we also ought to love one another.
Meno en gin mumiyo kare ducu amito poyo wiwu i lok magi, kadi bed wuŋeyogi, dok bene wumako matek likiŋ lok ada ma gityeko kelo botwu. 	So I will always remind you of these things, even though you know them and are firmly established in the truth you now have.
nyanynya ber mada me acamma ma numo 	tomatoes are very nice to be eaten raw 
litino dong gitye ka pakko lakgi me mwoddo ringo pien dong gitye ka bullone 	the children are eager and preparing to eat the meat because it is being grilled 
Yecu olwoŋo lwak bote kacel ki lupwonnyene, ci otito botgi ni, “Ka ce dano mo mito lubo kora, myero okwoŋ kwerre kekene, ka ocak tiŋo yatariyane, olub ki kora. 	Then he called the crowd to him along with his disciples and said: “Whoever wants to be my disciple must deny themselves and take up their cross and follow me.
leb meja man wudiir cen	lift this table and move it away
dano tin gupong mada ka nenno tuko adong 	there were very many people Who came to watch the boxing game
Lutowaŋ ki luŋolo gubino bote i ot pa Lubaŋa ci en ocaŋogi. 	The crowds answered, “This is Jesus, the prophet from Nazareth in Galilee.”
Ento i kom Wode en oloko ni, “Komkerri, in Lubaŋa, biri nakanaka, odoo kerri en odoo me ŋolo kop atir. 	But about the Son he says, “Your throne, O God, will last for ever and ever; a scepter of justice will be the scepter of your kingdom.
pang wii motoka odok tung lacuc wek pe kiony i opony 	turn the car to the right in order to avoid falling into the ditch
ocitto Skim komme bot ajwaka 	he went to the traditional healer to have the poison magically removed from his body
Alego ni pi lonyone me deyo myero omi Cwiny mere opoŋwu ki teko ki kero madwoŋ i iwu, 	from whom every family in heaven and on earth derives its name.
En owaccigi ni, “Wun wua ki piny, an aa ki malo	This made the Jews ask, “Will he kill himself? Is that why he says, ‘Where I go, you cannot come’?”
kongone onogo kec mada ci dong acommo woko ki coda	the alcohol was very strong and therefore I diluted it with soda
I kare meno two omake ci oto woko. Ka gityeko lwoko kome ci gupyelo i kicika ma malo. 	About that time she became sick and died, and her body was washed and placed in an upstairs room.
mon wango woro dyangme kado atwonna 	women burn the dry cow dung for alkali salt which is used for cooking vegetables
labika mokko kadi i yer kom lee 	labika can stick even on the animals hairs
pundi layub caa tye kwene?  	where is the watch repairer?
Doŋ cikke en ene ni, myero waye nyiŋ Wode Yecu Kricito, dok wamarre kekenwa, macalo en yam ocikowa. 	And this is his command: to believe in the name of his Son, Jesus Christ, and to love one another as he commanded us.
ento en jolo dano ma i rok ducu ma gilworo en ki ma gitiyo gin ma tye atir. 	but accepts from every nation the one who fears him and does what is right.
En mito laro jo ducu, dok mito ni jo ducu guŋe lok me ada. 	This is good, and pleases God our Savior,
Wumwolle kenwu i nyim Rwot, ci en bitiŋowu malo. 	Humble yourselves before the Lord, and he will lift you up.
Akot ocitto ka ommo pii I kulo	Akot went to fetch water from the river
Wuruk Rwot Yecu Kricito calo wuruko boŋowu, dok bene pe wutam pi kwowu me kit pa dano ma ginywalowu kwede pi cobo mitte.	Let us behave decently, as in the daytime, not in carousing and drunkenness, not in sexual immorality and debauchery, not in dissension and jealousy.
komme tye ka myel ni tee te marac mada 	he is shaking very much
Jo mogo me Jerucalem guwaco ni, “Man pe dano ma gimito neko-ni? 	Stop judging by mere appearances, but instead judge correctly.”
gubutto kuno nino acel ka orwone gudwoggo cen 	they spent one night there, and the following day they returned 
papal ne twerro pwonne 	the pawpaw can be plucked 
Tye ŋat mo i kinwu ma kome lit? Myero en olwoŋ ludoŋo me lwak pa Lubaŋa, wek guleg Lubaŋa pire kun giwire ki moo i nyiŋ Rwot. 	Is anyone among you sick? Let them call the elders of the church to pray over them and anoint them with oil in the name of the Lord.
Wumwolle kenwu i te twero pa Lubaŋa, wek ka kare oromo en otiŋwu malo. 	And when the Chief Shepherd appears, you will receive the crown of glory that will never fade away.
ento gikokowu ki remo pa Kricito me wel madwoŋ ma rom ki latin romo ma bal mo nyo roc mo pe i kome. 	For you know that it was not with perishable things such as silver or gold that you were redeemed from the empty way of life handed down to you from your ancestors,
Yecu dok oloko ki gin kun waco ni, “An a ceŋ me lobo	Jesus straightened up and asked her, “Woman, where are they? Has no one condemned you?”
ka gibalo nyiŋwa, wan wanwerre giwa anwera ki mwolo. Doŋ wadoko calo yugi me wi lobo	when we are slandered, we answer kindly
Nino madito me Bolo pa Lujudaya onoŋo cok. 	He did not want to go about in Judea because the Jewish leaders there were looking for a way to kill him.
Apokapoka dok obedo i kin Lujudaya pi lok man. 	This command I received from my Father.”
nen malo 	look up 
teerro nanga nyo opuk 	tuning the harp or opuk a string musical instrument whose base is usually tortoise shell
en doki marro jullo twatwal 	he loves sulkiness too much 
ki i care kama coron pe iye dano, gicitto gikonynye iye, ci meno dong callo gionynyo iye gin mayubbo ngom maber me pitto gin acamma iye 	in the rural area where there are no latrines, the people go and defaecate and these are like fertilisers which have been put there which make the field very good for growing crops
Pi tekone Lubaŋa omiyowa jami ducu ma kelo kwo ki cwiny me lworo en, wek waŋe en mulwoŋowa i deyone ki ditte kikome. 	His divine power has given us everything we need for a godly life through our knowledge of him who called us by his own glory and goodness.
raddo lok aradda 	speaking indiscriminately and angrily bad words
nyo ki nyiŋ lobo, pien meno kom me teno tyene, nyo kadi ki nyiŋ Jerucalem, pien meno gaŋ pa Kabaka madit. 	or by the earth, for it is his footstool; or by Jerusalem, for it is the city of the Great King.
ngayo latin i wii kitanda	placing the child on his back on the bed, with face upwards
Ento kodi ma gicoyo okir i ŋom maber-ri, aye dano ma winyo lok dok niaŋ iye	But the seed falling on good soil refers to someone who hears the word and understands it
pi luker ki jo ma tye i rwom ma malo, wek omi wabed mot laboŋo ayela, ma waworo Lubaŋa kun kitwa beco i yo ducu. 	I urge, then, first of all, that petitions, prayers, intercession and thanksgiving be made for all people—
“Ilaro gin aŋo kwedwa kaa, in Yecu Lanajaret? Doŋ ibino ka tyekowa bo? An aŋeyi, in i Ŋat Maleŋ pa Lubaŋa.” 	“Go away! What do you want with us, Jesus of Nazareth? Have you come to destroy us? I know who you are—the Holy One of God!”
romme mewa i Londo ki Okeny obeddo me gum mada pien warii mada ma ononggo pe wanenne 	our meeting, Okeny and I, was of great luck because we have not seen one another in a very long time 
tye ka lokko bongo mukene me arukka 	he is changing to another dress to wear 
bongo dong gilwokko, teer ka lakkone 	the clothes have been washed, take them to be rinsed 
Ento ka ŋat mo owaco botwu ni, “Man gin ma doŋ gityero bot jok,” pe wucam, pi paro pi ŋat ma doŋ otito lok meno pi poyo wiwu-ni, ki pi tamme ma i cwinye ma nyuto balle bote. 	But if someone says to you, “This has been offered in sacrifice,” then do not eat it, both for the sake of the one who told you and for the sake of conscience.
pimmo waar ma rommo tyen 	measuring the size of the shoes that will fit the feet 
Guwaco bote ni, “Ye Rwot Yecu, ci ibilarre, in ki jo ma i odi ducu.” 	They replied, “Believe in the Lord Jesus, and you will be saved—you and your household.”
oyo mapol pe golo ot	many rats cannot, all at once, dig a hole for their home
cammi remme 	the food is not enough for him
pe me lwoko cilo me kom, ento obedo macalo lega bot Lubaŋa wek wudok jo ma cwinywu leŋ, pi cer pa Yecu Kricito, 	and this water symbolizes baptism that now saves you also—not the removal of dirt from the body but the pledge of a clear conscience toward God
onoŋo tuŋe tye aryo calo min kulu. 	It had two horns like a lamb, but it spoke like a dragon.
Ci Yecu owaco bot lupwonnyene ni, “Ada awaco botwu ni, bibedo tek mada bot dano ma lalonyo me donyo i ker me polo. 	Then Jesus said to his disciples, “Truly I tell you, it is hard for someone who is rich to enter the kingdom of heaven.
Adada awacciwu ni, ka ŋat mo mako lokka, pe bito matwal.” 	The Jews answered him, “Aren’t we right in saying that you are a Samaritan and demon-possessed?”
lalilla pe kanno lok i cwinynye 	an untrustworthy person cannot keep secret 
nyok dyel tye ka itto min dyel 	a he goat is having coitus with or mounting a she-goat
buk man dong obamme woko kom lawotte pe twerro pokke	the book is now stuck to the other and cannot be separated
wulegi, wubinoŋo, wek wupoŋ ki yomcwiny. 	Until now you have not asked for anything in my name
poorro kit yoo ma ngati mo timmo kwede	copying the way how one does it
Ladit tin ojogge mada ki Lim me konyno kanica  	the priest today collected a lot of money to help the church
Ka man otimme, lutwo mukene ducu ma i cula-nu gubino bote ci gucaŋ. 	When this had happened, the rest of the sick on the island came and were cured.
cik obwoo i kora yoo lee, wek omakgi ka giriggo, ma gitye ka ryemmogi 	lay a net across the way of the animals, so that they may be caught in it, when they are running while they are being chased
obinno awene 	when did he come? 
ywe, cam, mati, bed ki yomcwiny.’ 	Take life easy; eat, drink and be merry.”’
tye ka gallo kwon 	he is eating kwon without the sauce 
ger pa Opio gi pe ber 	the marriage of Opio and his wife is not good
Ket tek me konyo Jena ma en dano ma ŋeyo cik, gin ki Apolo, i wotgi, nen ni gin mo pe orem botgi. 	As soon as I send Artemas or Tychicus to you, do your best to come to me at Nicopolis, because I have decided to winter there.
Ka gucako ruko Yecu ki boŋo makwar, ka gucweyo lulakana okuto, gurwako i wiye, 	They put a purple robe on him, then twisted together a crown of thorns and set it on him.
twoddo latin ot mo  	building a small round hut
cam wunu oyo oyot ni wici-wici 	do eat with speed and quickly 
twerro ryemme ka beddo ka binno lacen i dog ticce 	he can be dismissed if he comes frequently late to his work
twerro cibbe piny 	can be put down
palaa ne purre pe ber 	the knife's handle is not good 
ludito guoo ma onongo ceng dong tye abwora	the elders arrived in the afternoon between two and three Pm
wangge twero pedde malac 	his eyes can be opened widely 
puggo dong bege tek mada 	closing the bank's door is very difficult
ma ceŋ ocero kwede Kricito ki i kin jo muto, ka okete obedo i kabedo me deyo ka ŋete tuŋ acuc i polo. 	I pray that the eyes of your heart may be enlightened in order that you may know the hope to which he has called you, the riches of his glorious inheritance in his holy people,
Pien kado ma bilonyo kom dano acel acel en aye mac. 	Everyone will be salted with fire.
Cimon Petero onoŋo tye ki pala lucwan	This happened so that the words he had spoken would be fulfilled: “I have not lost one of those you gave me.”
Yakobo ocito i Ejipt, ci oto woko, en kikome ki kwarowa ducu, 	Then Jacob went down to Egypt, where he and our ancestors died.
Ci owacca ni, ‘A woko ki kany, pien abicwali ka mabor bot Lurok.’ ” 	“Then the Lord said to me, ‘Go; I will send you far away to the Gentiles.’ ”
walwokko bongowa ki cabun	we wash our clothes with soap
Iweny pe gin maber	to fight is not a good thing
Anek en aye lapit maber mada, nen man litino ducu ma en opittongi, gudonggo woko ducu mabecco mada 	Anek is the one who is good at bringing up the children
Jo ma yam gibedo i piny macol doŋ guneno dero ceŋ madit, jo ma yam gibedo i lobo ki i tipo me to, ceŋ doŋ otuc woko omenyogi.” 	the people living in darkness have seen a great light; on those living in the land of the shadow of death a light has dawned.”
tukke ki kany bibeddo aweene? 	when will his flying time be? 
Yecu odokkigi iye ni, “Cawa doŋ oromo me keto deyo i kom Wod pa dano. 	Now there were some Greeks among those who went up to worship at the festival.
Amito aŋe Kricito, ki teko ma en ocer kwede, amito bene anywak kwede can ma en ociro, adok calo en i tone, 	and be found in him, not having a righteousness of my own that comes from the law, but that which is through faith in Christ—the righteousness that comes from God on the basis of faith.
boŋo kicika me ot pa Lubaŋa obar, dyere opokke aryo. 	And the curtain of the temple was torn in two.
Pi meno ka Lubaŋa oye wek abin botwu ki yomcwiny madwoŋ, ci koŋ aywe bene kacel kwedwu. 	Pray that I may be kept safe from the unbelievers in Judea and that the contribution I take to Jerusalem may be favorably received by the Lord’s people there,
Ci dako meno, ka oŋeyo kit gin ma otimme i kome, obino bot Yecu ki lworo, kun kome myel, oryebbe i nyime, otitte lok ducu me ada. 	Then the woman, knowing what had happened to her, came and fell at his feet and, trembling with fear, told him the whole truth.
kella bongo opotino me kor 	bring for me the vest 
Pien Lubaŋa yam ociko ni, ‘Wor woru ki meni’, ka dok ni, ‘Ŋat ma loko lok marac i kom wonne nyo i kom minne myero ginek woko aneka.’ 	Jesus replied, “And why do you break the command of God for the sake of your tradition?
Ka kare okato manoknok, jo ma onoŋo gucuŋ kenyo gubino guwaco bot Petero ni, “Ada, in i ŋat acel i kingi, pien kit ma iloko kwede nyuti woko.” 	After a little while, those standing there went up to Peter and said, “Surely you are one of them; your accent gives you away.”
lokko mamit mada 	he is an entertainer, or very humourous, speaks very well 
Lobo pe twero kwerowu, ento okwero an, pien an atuco lok i kome, ni ticce ducu racu. 	Therefore Jesus told them, “My time is not yet here; for you any time will do.
nen man, ioyo pii woko i kom buk 	look, you have poured water on the books
Dano man ocito bot Pilato, olego pi kom Yecu. 	Going to Pilate, he asked for Jesus’ body.
Man aye gin ma obedo ka geŋa tyen mapol me bino botwu. 	Rather, as it is written: “Those who were not told about him will see, and those who have not heard will understand.”
nen wangge ma ogolle kwedde 	look at his sunken eyes
wa rom 	we are the same 
macalo yam oloko i dog lunebine maleŋ ma gubedo nia con ki con, 	(as he said through his holy prophets of long ago),
wang bao ma giribboni ka pe giribbo maber ci gwette woko 	the place where the wood plank which has been joined if it has not been well joined it will come off 
rwicco ladep ki lwet cing	to crush a flea with the finger nails
En owaco botgi ni, “Wubin kenwu ka ma dano pe iye, wuywe manok.” Pien jo mapol onoŋo gibedo ka bino, gidok cen, kun gigwennye agwenya, omiyo pe gubedo ki kare mo me cam. 	Then, because so many people were coming and going that they did not even have a chance to eat, he said to them, “Come with me by yourselves to a quiet place and get some rest.”
Gin pe doŋ giparo gin mo, oweko doŋ gumine kengi i tim me tarwaŋ, dok bene giwor matek i timo lwak tim caro caro mapol.	They are darkened in their understanding and separated from the life of God because of the ignorance that is in them due to the hardening of their hearts.
kwadege nginno cet mulugge ka en aye dong lorro 	the beetle moulds the faeces or dung into shape of a ball, which it rolls about
ngwen keken okokke peke	only white ants, no soldier ants?
Gedo man okubbe kacel ki Kricito, dok bene tye ka doŋo me doko ot pa Lubaŋa maleŋ i Rwot. 	built on the foundation of the apostles and prophets, with Christ Jesus himself as the chief cornerstone.
doggolane nino ducu yabbe kene 	the door always opens itself 
gony jo ma gimakkongi woko 	release all those who have been arrested 
macalo yam gicoyo ni, “Ŋat ma ocoko mabup, gin mo pe odoŋ bote, ŋat mucoko manok mo, gin mo pe orem bote.” 	The goal is equality,
Ka ajwagi madito pa Lubaŋa ki Luparicayo guwinyo carolokke, ci guniaŋ ni onoŋo kara Yecu tye ka lok i komgi. 	“Therefore I tell you that the kingdom of God will be taken away from you and given to a people who will produce its fruit.
wii meja man twerro line maber mada 	the top of this table can be very well polished
acitto bot pilkiana wek okonya ki pido 	I went to my pleader to help me with my case
kello dek ma nok 	bringing not enough food  
kun gimito pwonnye i kare ducu, ento pe dok gitwero niaŋ i lok ada. 	They are the kind who worm their way into homes and gain control over gullible women, who are loaded down with sins and are swayed by all kinds of evil desires,
obinno ma orukke ki cuti ma komme obeddo amir amir 	he came dressed in a greyish brown suit
man aye cikke, macalo iwinyo nia i acakki, ni myero wabed ki mar. 	And this is love: that we walk in obedience to his commands
orem benebene dyewor ki iye piny omeddo ki ruu ka dong onywal 	she suffered from her birth pain throughout the night until day break when she delivered
cwinynye beddi wet-wet 	his mind is over anxious and excited to do something
Pe myero giket can i kom dano mo i kinwu pi nek, nyo pi kwo, nyo pi timo gin mo marac, nyo pi laro lok i gin pa ŋat mo mukene. 	If you are insulted because of the name of Christ, you are blessed, for the Spirit of glory and of God rests on you.
Yecu otiŋo waŋe malo, ci oneno lulonyo kun gibolo motgi i canduk lim i ot pa Lubaŋa. 	As Jesus looked up, he saw the rich putting their gifts into the temple treasury.
dong canduk twolo 	the lid of the box is open
Minne ociko lutic ni, “Wutim gin ducu ma en biwacciwu.” 	When the wine was gone, Jesus’ mother said to him, “They have no more wine.”
En odok iye ni, “Yam aneno Catan kun poto piny nia ki i polo macalo lutkot. 	He replied, “I saw Satan fall like lightning from heaven.
bul myel man ginynyo kom mada 	the sound of this dance drum excites very much the body
yaarre i wii lyel pa nyekke calo en ma onekko nyekke 	full of happiness during the funeral of her co-wife as if she was the one who killed her
wotto ni gik-gik 	walks with heavy sound on the ground 
litino gimaarro cwiit mada 	the children love sweets very much 
lulweny macon gibeddo ki lapel mapol ma girukko i kor bonggigi 	the war veterans do have many medals which they wear, which are fixed on the clothes of the left side of their chests
Icaya doki cwinye obedo tek me waco ni, “Jo ma yam pe giyenya doŋ gunoŋa, doŋ bene atyeko nyutte woko ka maleŋ bot jo ma onoŋo pe gipenyo pira.” 	Again I ask: Did Israel not understand? First, Moses says, “I will make you envious by those who are not a nation; I will make you angry by a nation that has no understanding.”
libbo pii i kulu ki agwata wek pe gitwom daba 	to scoop the water with gourd cup in order to avoid collecting mud
latin ma oding mape lworo odoo 	a stubborn child who does not care about being beaten 
dongge pe twerro gamme pien lit twatwal 	his mouth cannot be opened because it is very painful
Pien Lubaŋa aye ma oketo mit man i cwinygi, wek gucob tamme kun gibedo ki cwiny acel, ka wek doŋ gumi twerogi bot lee ca, nio waŋ ma lok ma Lubaŋa owaco ocobbe kakare. 	For God has put it into their hearts to accomplish his purpose by agreeing to hand over to the beast their royal authority, until God’s words are fulfilled.
pim remone ka maleriya tye iye ' 	examine the blood to find out if there are malaria parasites in it
pul manok twerro yogge i kom man pien pud nok twatwal pe rommo latili acel 	some more groundnuts can be added to this one because it is still little and not yet one pound
Cikke ma onoŋo yam Lubaŋa ociko bot Abraim ki likwaye, ni, wi lobo ducu bibedo megi, gin mumiyo ociko, pe ni Abraim yam ocobo cik, ento pein en onoŋo oye Lubaŋa, ka doŋ gikwane ni kite atir. 	And he is then also the father of the circumcised who not only are circumcised but who also follow in the footsteps of the faith that our father Abraham had before he was circumcised.
wangge lit 	he has an eye sore 
Pien cik doŋ ogik woko i Kricito, wek omi jo ma ye en gikwangi ni kitgi atir. 	Since they did not know the righteousness of God and sought to establish their own, they did not submit to God’s righteousness.
pe ilwob romo i nget poto 	don't tie the sheep near the fields
pakko jamine  	adoring his properties, children
Moses ceŋ omiyowu cik me lirre (pe ni oa ki bot Moses, ento ki bot kwaro), wun bene wuliro dano i ceŋ cabit. 	Jesus said to them, “I did one miracle, and you are all amazed.
tad wii ot 	construct a wooden frame of the house
mon en aye maarro lokkone twatwal ka gin mo otimme i komgi 	the women are the people who love very much to use the word? when something happens to them
garro lee ki tong 	spearing the animal with the spear going through its body and fixed there, that is, it cannot move 
lajaja cupa ma otoo ego matye i aduku myerro dong gubed me awukka i coron 	all these broken pieces of bottles, which are in this basket, should now be for pouring into the pit latrine
coc matye i kom bao ni twerro jwaane  	the writing on the blackboard can be wiped off polished
ngaa ma lalar twatwal i kin wu ni? 	who is the one that is always disputing for things among you? 
pien doŋ giyabo yo bota malac me tiyo tic matek kany, dok jo ma geŋo tic pol. 	because a great door for effective work has opened to me, and there are many who oppose me.
Onoŋo tye kunnu laco mo ma twone doŋ ori i kome mwaka pyeradek wiye aboro. 	Here a great number of disabled people used to lie—the blind, the lame, the paralyzed.
Tye ŋat mukene ma en aye cadenna, aŋeyo ni lok ma en bolo i koma lok me ada. 	“If I testify about myself, my testimony is not true.
odok ma i itte myerro gigot woko  	the wax in his ears should be removed
en diyo cwinye nio waŋ ma kot me cwir ki me oro ocwer. 	See how the farmer waits for the land to yield its valuable crop, patiently waiting for the autumn and spring rains.
gulokko ci guniangge maber ni dong gibitiyo kacel 	they talked and understood each other that they will work together
Pien ka Daudi yam otyeko tic kun cobo yub pa Lubaŋa, en oto, ci giyiko kacel ki kwarine, kome otop woko. 	“Now when David had served God’s purpose in his own generation, he fell asleep; he was buried with his ancestors and his body decayed.
wa aa i kaka me Palabek	we are the descendants of the Palabek clan
nakke manok wek okatti  	turn aside a little to let him pass
Lubaŋa ma yam ocweyo lobo ki jami ducu ma tye iye-ni, en aye Rwot me polo ki lobo, pe bedo i ot ma dano gutiyo ki ciŋgi, 	“The God who made the world and everything in it is the Lord of heaven and earth and does not live in temples built by human hands.
Pe wudwok tim marac pi tim marac, nyo yet ki yet	Finally, all of you, be like-minded, be sympathetic, love one another, be compassionate and humble.
Myero doŋ wuwek kare ma yam wubedo iye ka tiyo gin ma jo ma pe ŋeyo Lubaŋa gimaro timo oromwu. Yam wulubo kit me tarwaŋ, ki miti me kom, mero, karama me woro cam ki tuko marac, mat, ki woro jogi ma ic dagi. 	As a result, they do not live the rest of their earthly lives for evil human desires, but rather for the will of God.
twee me karatac maggi obeddo maber omiyo pe gurug 	the binding of these sheets of paper was very good, that is why they did not crumble
ojiggo badde matek ci tweyo cingge oloyogi woko 	he tightened his arm muscles and made his arms rigid and consequently they were unable to handcuff him
Ŋat mo twero waco ni, ka Abraim, omiyo dul acel me apar, Levi bene kikome, ma jogo dul acel me apar, yam omiyo mere kun wok ki bot Abraim, 	One might even say that Levi, who collects the tenth, paid the tenth through Abraham,
wek okok jo ma yam tye i te loc me cik, ka wek wan bene gilokwa wadok litino me paco. 	But when the set time had fully come, God sent his Son, born of a woman, born under the law,
ka doŋ waŋolo nam atir i ŋet lobo Cilicia ki Pampulia, wao i Mira ma i lobo Licia. 	When we had sailed across the open sea off the coast of Cilicia and Pamphylia, we landed at Myra in Lycia.
puk kado i dek ento pe madowong twatwal 	put some salt into the sauce but not too much 
Dano pe olub gin ma konyo en keken, ento myero olub gin ma konyo lawote bene. 	No one should seek their own good, but the good of others.
yikko dano ma otoo 	burying a dead person
Pi lok man mumiyo awacciwu ni, gin ducu ma wupenyo ci wulego Lubaŋa pire, ber wuye ni doŋ wulimo ci wubinoŋone ada. 	Therefore I tell you, whatever you ask for in prayer, believe that you have received it, and it will be yours.
Ka dok acito i lobo Ciria ki Cilicia, 	I assure you before God that what I am writing you is no lie.
yet yat magi me teke me guurro laa 	sharpen these pieces of wood into wooden nails for nailing the hide
i kare macon mon wirro komgi ki paala ka gicitto ka myel 	long time ago women used to smear their bodies with red ochre when going to dance
Yecu odok iye ki gin ni, “Koni doŋ wuye? 	This makes us believe that you came from God.”
twoo abaji okwotto badde woko	his arm is swollen by the syphilitic infection
Yecu owaco botgi ni, “Luker pa Lurok gibwoyo lwakgi ki tek, jo ma tye ki twero i komgi gilwoŋogi ni lutim-ber. 	Jesus said to them, “The kings of the Gentiles lord it over them; and those who exercise authority over them call themselves Benefactors.
ogoyo agulu ma i ot oginynyo gi woko ginyi-ginyi 	he beat all the pots in the house and broke them completely into pieces
wot kiok tung lacam 	walk bearing to the left
citto ka rokko ngati i dog ticce pe ber	going to disturb somebody at his work is not good
piny dong owanynye 	the weather has cleared out
Ento ka omegine doŋ gutyeko cito pi nino madito, ci en bene ocito, pe atyer, ento i muŋ. 	After he had said this, he stayed in Galilee.
Rom ki tobi ma dako mo okwanyo, orubo ki moko mugati ma romo adita adek, nio ka moko ducu oyenyo, okwot.” 	It is like yeast that a woman took and mixed into about sixty pounds of flour until it worked all through the dough.”
otimme awene? 	when did it happen? 
Lacen aneno lumalaika aŋwen gucuŋ i but lobo aŋwen ducu, ma gigeŋo yamo me lobo woko, wek yamo mo pe okod i lobo, nyo i nam, kadi ki i kom yat mo. 	After this I saw four angels standing at the four corners of the earth, holding back the four winds of the earth to prevent any wind from blowing on the land or on the sea or on any tree.
okok ocammo lwak buk mapol mada matye i laibari 	the small termites have eaten many books which are in the library
marro gwinno ringo 	likes to eat meat bit by bit
gitye ka purro poto caa 	they are cultivating the field there
Lubaŋa ma miyo dano ducu bedo ki gen myero omi yomcwiny ducu ki kuc opoŋ i iwu pi niyewu i kome, wek genwu obed ka medde ameda pi tek pa Cwiny Maleŋ. 	And again, “Praise the Lord, all you Gentiles; let all the peoples extol him.”
baggo dano ki yat 	making people foolish and senseless with medicine
Ŋat ma kayo limo mucara, coko nyig pi kwo ma pe tum, wek lacoyone ki lakayone igi obed yom kacel. 	Don’t you have a saying, ‘It’s still four months until harvest’? I tell you, open your eyes and look at the fields! They are ripe for harvest.
cwal god ocit ka ommo pii i kulu 	send the slave to fetch water from the river
jal e litino wek gucam bene 	this remaining little food should now be left fok far children to also eat 
pimmo remo me nenno ka kwidi me maleriya tye iye	to examine the blood to find out if there are malaria parasites in it
Otto cal mada ki neerone 	Otto closely resembles his uncle 
Jo ducu gumiyo caden maber i kom Demetrio, kadi lok ada obedo caden pire	I wrote to the church, but Diotrephes, who loves to be first, will not welcome us.
Pi meno, lurema, ka wutye ka kuro man, wuket tek wek Lubaŋa pe onoŋ roc mo nyo bal mo i komwu, ento onoŋ wutye ki kuc. 	So then, dear friends, since you are looking forward to this, make every effort to be found spotless, blameless and at peace with him.
olang pa lacoone ononggo dong opong ki got keken 	the man's kidney was full of renal stones 
litino gunekko winyo abic ki lacuur 	the children killed five birds with stones from the sling 
yab doggola 	open the door 
en dong oo i rwom mene i mony? 	what rank is he in the army? 
Konyo dano ma olimo lobo ducu ki gin aŋo mono, ka ce kwone gikwanyo woko? Dano dok bimiyo kit gin aŋo ma ka kwone? 	What good will it be for someone to gain the whole world, yet forfeit their soul? Or what can anyone give in exchange for their soul?
Cutcut en ogamo ni, “Kicana tye ma rommi, pien tekona bedo tek twatwal ka ma goro tye iye.” En meno gin mumiyo anyatte ki yomcwiny madit twatwal pi gorona, wek tek pa Kricito obed i koma. 	Three times I pleaded with the Lord to take it away from me.
man en aye tot me laywa yat ma opotto i yoo 	this is the rope for dragging
kun cikogi ni, “Wucit i gaŋ ma tye i nyimwu. Ka ce wudonyo iye wubinoŋo latin kana ma gitweyo, ma ŋat mo peya oito i wiye	“Go to the village ahead of you, and as you enter it, you will find a colt tied there, which no one has ever ridden
Onoŋo peya gitweyo Jon i mabuc. 	But whoever lives by the truth comes into the light, so that it may be seen plainly that what they have done has been done in the sight of God.
Ento jo aryo nyo adek ma gitito lok Lubaŋa gitwero lok, kun jo mukene-gu giŋiyo lok ma giloko. 	Two or three prophets should speak, and the others should weigh carefully what is said.
lameego tin okwerro teddo woko	the sister has refused to cook 
ngat ma tye ki langok myerro lwokko tere tere dok pe wirro iye moo 	a person who has pimples on his face, should wash the face frequently and not smear it with oil
tummo romo	to sacrifice sheep by killing it
miyo litino me woo i kilaci pe ber	letting the children to shout in the class is not good 
ento ŋat ma timo tim kwele balo kome kene. 	All other sins a person commits are outside the body, but whoever sins sexually, sins against their own body.
reg nyim man ma pwot  	grind this simsim very finely
Doŋ wuti gin ma nyuto ni wuŋut i kom balwu, 	But when he saw many of the Pharisees and Sadducees coming to where he was baptizing, he said to them: “You brood of vipers! Who warned you to flee from the coming wrath?
Pien koma en cam meada, remona en ginamata meada. 	Whoever eats my flesh and drinks my blood has eternal life, and I will raise them up at the last day.
ci odoŋo, odoko yat madit, winyo me polo gibino gigero odigi i jaŋe.” 	It grew and became a tree, and the birds perched in its branches.”
myero doŋ wanyiku cok bot Lubaŋa ki cwiny me ada, kun niye bene doŋ odonyo matut i cwinywa, ma doŋ cwinywa leŋ, pien ŋec me gin maraco ma yam watimo doŋ gikwanyo woko, dok bene komwa doŋ gilwoko woko ki pii maleŋ. 	let us draw near to God with a sincere heart and with the full assurance that faith brings, having our hearts sprinkled to cleanse us from a guilty conscience and having our bodies washed with pure water.
rwany i catini ka dong imoo otwoo 	turn inside out your shirt and then put it to dry
omiyo Yecu odonyo i yeya, odok cen. 	So he got into the boat and left.
Jo macalo meno myero guniaŋ ni, pe tye apokapoka mo i lok ma wacoyo i waragawa ka watye cen ka mabor, ki gin ma wabitimo ka watye kacel kwedwu. 	For some say, “His letters are weighty and forceful, but in person he is unimpressive and his speaking amounts to nothing.”
la gwok man ki cet ma ingwinye	punish each puppy because of its own excreta
okatto woko munero 	he came out stark naked 
tek mada me beddo ki lacoo ma pire lok 	it is very difficult to live-with a man who always broods about old matters 
ngor onyak ngoro-ngoro 	the peas have produced forth big pods with big peas inside 
ocitto bot ajwaka ka tyet	he went to a witch to consult the spirit
ngeyo kit me loyo mak me mucoro 	he knows how to escape from being arrested for tax evasion
Gulunyo boŋone woko ki i kome, ka doŋ guruke ki boŋo makwar. 	Then the governor’s soldiers took Jesus into the Praetorium and gathered the whole company of soldiers around him.
bonggo jammi atata dye wor ceng mo ibonggo twol ma bitonggo cinggi	touching everything at night without care, one day you might touch a snake which will bite your hand 
Jo mukene mapol guye en pi lokke. 	Many of the Samaritans from that town believed in him because of the woman’s testimony, “He told me everything I ever did.”
Ka gumakogi ci guketogi i mabuc nio wa odiko, pien onoŋo piny doŋ oyuto woko. 	They seized Peter and John and, because it was evening, they put them in jail until the next day.
latin dong wotto maber 	the child now walks well 
pur poto man ci imwol dogge maber 	cultivate and cut the edges ot the field very well
Yam gicoyo i cik ni, “Abiloko ki jo me rok man i leb ma jo dumo kwede aduma ki i dog jo ma gin lurok ento kadi bed kumeno, gin pe gibiwinyo lokka, man lok pa Rwot.” 	In the Law it is written: “With other tongues and through the lips of foreigners I will speak to this people, but even then they will not listen to me, says the Lord.”
parro mada gin angoo ma myero etim	meditates very much as to what he should do
lyer bongo kabu men i kom mucumar matye i kom doggola 	hang your overcoat on the nail on the door 
Ento abibedo i Epeco nio wa i kare me Pentekote, 	But I will stay on at Ephesus until Pentecost,
cok bonggi matye woko i wii tol ci bangi maber ka dong iteer iketgi i canduk 	collect the clothes on the lines, fold them, take them and put them into the box 
Ci lupwonnye gudokke iye ni, “Kara man wabinoŋo mugati kwene ma twero romo lwak macalo man i tim kany?” 	And they praised the God of Israel.
Minne otitte lok roro, omiyo nyako-nu ocito olego kabaka ni, “Amito imiya wi Jon Labatija i weer kombeddi.” 	that he promised with an oath to give her whatever she asked.
Gukwanyo jaŋ otit, gukato ka jole, kun gidaŋŋe ni, “Ojana! Lubaŋa o mi gum i kom ŋat ma bino i nyiŋ Rwot, ma en Kabaka pa Icrael!” 	The next day the great crowd that had come for the festival heard that Jesus was on his way to Jerusalem.
pii ma tye ka cweer malo ki i tangi tye dong ka motto oo wa i kom ot 	the water that has been leaking from the tank is now permeating down to the wall of the house
adii ma wanenno callo kit eno ma otimme kany pe dong wauro	how many such things have happened here, we do not worry or we no longer worry
mitto lokke dini mukene 	he wants to change to another religion
Ento ŋat ma timo gin me ada bino i ceŋ, wek ticce onen ka maleŋ, ni en tiyo i Lubaŋa. 	Everyone who does evil hates the light, and will not come into the light for fear that their deeds will be exposed.
pimmo remo me nenno ka kwidi me maleriya tye iye 	examining the blood to find out if there are malaria parasites in it
juk Latin pe obal pii 	stop the child from spoiling the water 
Ento pe awacci, lok pa Lubaŋa pe otiyo gin mo	Theirs are the patriarchs, and from them is traced the human ancestry of the Messiah, who is God over all, forever praised! Amen.
i cim itwerro lok ki latinni i caa mo keken ma imitto 	telephone you can talk to your child at any time that you want
Ka Yecu oneno ni odok iye maber ki ryeko, ocako dok wacce ni, “In pe ibor ki ker pa Lubaŋa.” Lacen pe dok tye ŋat mo ma odiyo cwinye ka penye ki lok mo. 	When Jesus saw that he had answered wisely, he said to him, “You are not far from the kingdom of God.” And from then on no one dared ask him any more questions.
letac bene ramme ma numo maber mada 	lettuce is also eaten raw
Ento ryekone oloyogi, ki Cwiny Maleŋ ma en loko kwede. 	But they could not stand up against the wisdom the Spirit gave him as he spoke.
oo wa con 	has already arrived 
cutto cam i dong 	to take food into the mouth
gimakko larot piny acel kany ma ononggo tye ka rotto piny pi lobone 	one spy was arrested here who was spying for his country
Doŋ dano acel acel ma yam oweko odi, nyo omege nyo nyimege, nyo wonne, nyo minne, nyo litino, nyo pottine, pi nyiŋa, binoŋo jami makato magi tyen miya, ci en binoŋo kwo ma pe tum. 	And everyone who has left houses or brothers or sisters or father or mother or wife or children or fields for my sake will receive a hundred times as much and will inherit eternal life.
Yecu oa woko ki kunnu, odok i lobo tugi, lupwonnyene gulube. 	Jesus left there and went to his hometown, accompanied by his disciples.
Wun opii, wumine kenwu i te loc pa Luditowu ki kit woro ducu, pe bot jo ma lukica ki jo mamwol keken, ento bot jo mager bene. 	Show proper respect to everyone, love the family of believers, fear God, honor the emperor.
latin odong i tang laro, jo tungi dong gutoo woko liweng 	the child is now left on his own, unprotected because all his relatives have died
ticwa 	our work
pien ka pe acito, ci Lacuŋudwar pe bibino botwu. Ento ka acito, ci abiore botwu. 	But very truly I tell you, it is for your good that I am going away
Pien Dema doŋ oweka woko pi maro jami me lobo-ni, ocito gire woko i Tecalonika	Do your best to come to me quickly,
Ka Petero onene, openyo Yecu ni, “Rwot, danoni kono?” 	Again Jesus said, “Simon son of John, do you love me?” He answered, “Yes, Lord, you know that I love you.” Jesus said, “Take care of my sheep.”
it latinne nenni tye ka perre medde amedda 	the child's ears seem to becoming wide and wider 
gunyatto labwor ki tong matek mada 	they speared the lion over and over many times
tic man twerro tenynye 	the work can be left or abandoned 
Ento i kare ma en oneno Luparicayo ki Lucadukayo gibino kun gimito ni en ebatijagi, owaco botgi ni, “Wun litino twol ororo, aŋa ma owaco botwu ni myero wuriŋ woko ki i akemo pa Lubaŋa ma mito bino-ni? 	Confessing their sins, they were baptized by him in the Jordan River.
Petero owacce ni, “Titta ka onoŋo wucato lobowu i wel ma rom meno.” 	Peter asked her, “Tell me, is this the price you and Ananias got for the land?” “Yes,” she said, “that is the price.”
Watito ryeko bot jo muteggi, ento ryeko man pe ryeko me lobo-ni, nyo ryeko pa luloc me kare man, ma twerogi rwenyo woko-ni. 	We do, however, speak a message of wisdom among the mature, but not the wisdom of this age or of the rulers of this age, who are coming to nothing.
moo dyang ka giketto kama lyet ci ngoo woko 	if butter is put in a warm place, it melts away 
Man pe lapac, wod pa Maliam, omin Yakobo, ki Yoce, ki Juda ki Cimon? Dok nyimegine pe gitye botwa kany?” Ci cwinygi ocako a woko i kome. 	Isn’t this the carpenter? Isn’t this Mary’s son and the brother of James, Joseph, Judas and Simon? Aren’t his sisters here with us?” And they took offense at him.
gin ma timme kuno ngat moo pe ma ngeyo 	nobody knows what happens there 
Wun bene gitye ka gerowu kacel i kome, wek wubed ot ma Cwiny pa Lubaŋa bedo iye.	In him the whole building is joined together and rises to become a holy temple in the Lord.
ka ma kwidi ma camogi pe to, ki macce bene pe to.] 	‘the worms that eat them do not die, and the fire is not quenched.’
poo jami ducu macon ma yang itiyo ci pieno myerro pe dong i par twatwal ni in dong pe ikonynyo i kare man 	remember all those good things which you did, therefore, do not feel depressed that you are now useless
Utmegina, gin ma aloko en ene ni, kare doŋ odoko diŋ	What I mean, brothers and sisters, is that the time is short
Lupwonnye gucako pennye kekengi ni, aŋa i kingi ma bitimo lok man. 	They began to question among themselves which of them it might be who would do this.
En ocako penyogi ni, “Wun wumito ni atimmiwu kit gin aŋo?” 	“What do you want me to do for you?” he asked.
ka pe gunoŋe, ci gudok cen i Jerucalem ka yenye. 	When they did not find him, they went back to Jerusalem to look for him.
Batija pa Jon twerone oa ki bot Lubaŋa nyo oa ki bot dano? Wun wudokka iye.” 	John’s baptism—was it from heaven, or of human origin? Tell me!”
Pien Yecu kikome otito ni, “Lanebi mo pe ma giketo deyo kome i lobo tugi.” 	After the two days he left for Galilee.
ka dano ducu dong gutyeko Iwok ci dong wacittu ka cam 	when all the people have finished taking bath, then let us go to eat
tot kic ki i bong maca 	take or collect honey from that beehive 
meeggi litino mapol ma ikare man pe gicirro cwiic pa litino  	many present mothers do not endure the sucking of the children
twerro twodde 	can be made round
Pien Lubaŋa con omaro lobo kumeno, omiyo iye Wode acel keken, wek dano ducu ma ye en owek to, ento obed ki kwo ma pe tum. 	that everyone who believes may have eternal life in him.”
cittu ka wer 	go to sing 
an bene adano adana.” 	“Stand up,” he said, “I am only a man myself.”
Kricito mono iye opokke? Yam kono giguro Paulo i kom yatariya piwa? Onoŋo yam gibatijawu i nyiŋ Paulo? 	Is Christ divided? Was Paul crucified for you? Were you baptized in the name of Paul?
gollo lok nyo gollo lok ki ii dano 	drawing out words or statements from the people by investigation or enquiry
Ka kono nene alwenyo ki lee mager i Epeco, macalo dano giwaco-ni, kono ki kony mene ma anoŋo iye? Ka cero jo muto pe, ci ber doŋ “wacamu, wamatu, pien diki wabito woko.” 	If I fought wild beasts in Ephesus with no more than human hopes, what have I gained? If the dead are not raised, “Let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we die.”
otiyo tic maber twatwal	he did a very good job 
twenynyo bol tong	to straighten the shaft of the spear
Ka pud omoko i kom Petero ki Jon, ci lwak dano ducu guriŋo gucokke botgi i te baraja ma gilwoŋo ni pa Solomon. 	While the man held on to Peter and John, all the people were astonished and came running to them in the place called Solomon’s Colonnade.
omarogi nio i agik, 	Jesus knew that the hour had come for him to leave this world and go to the Father
tye ka ceere i kom bongo pa lawotte ni meno meere 	he is rowing a boat
Wucito kunnu pi?o? Wucito ka neno lanebi mo? Iyo, awacciwu ni ka neno ŋat ma kato lanebi. 	Then what did you go out to see? A prophet? Yes, I tell you, and more than a prophet.
ka gimitti laput ocang oyot ci myerro gimiine cam ma tye iye ringo ki cak madowong 	if a malnourished child is wanted to heal quickly, he must be given plenty of meat and milk
the drum is very loud logo pa butte, pi karre ducu ma gigoyo kany, ikare me ribbe wa dyewor, geggowa nino woko 	the loudness of the drum, from time to time, when it is played here up to the night during wedding ceremony, prevents us from sleeping
ladit ma miini juc meno nonggo maarri pien ka pe maarri wekki mape miini juc nio ka i potto i bal 	a master who gives you warning loves you, because if he does not like you, he leaves you alone until you fall into trouble
inoŋo pii me kwo meno ki kwene? 	“Sir,” the woman said, “you have nothing to draw with and the well is deep
wer kom ot man ki ranggi ma obeddo ocwak ocwak 	paint or redecorate this house with yellow colour or paint
dako ma lagonno 	a woman who is well behaved, clean and of pleasing deportment and keeps all things in her house in order
rab ki ngee ot 	go round the house 
tuc bal meeri 	confess your sin 
dano ducu gingeyo ni an mera arac 	everybody knows that I am bad
pien onoŋo gin lumak-rec. 	They were casting a net into the lake, for they were fishermen.
kiyata tye ka twak 	the potatoes are boiling on the fire and making loud noise
yoo me gecce ma en gecco ki dano pe ber 	the way he backbites people is not good 
lim madowong aa i pur 	wealth comes from farming
awobe gitye ka royo duo me amwodda pa ludito	the boys are grilling the meat for the elders to eat
uk doggi pien dek opong i tee lakki 	rinse your mouth because there is much food under your teeth 
en pe mitto tayi ma kwaar 	he does not like red ties 
winyone pud peya otoo pien pud pappe 	the bird is not yet dead because it is still flapping its wings
Pi niye, ka yam ginywalo Moses, lunyodone gukane pi dwe adek kun pe gulworo cik pa kabaka, pien onoŋo guneno ni latin ca ber mada. 	By faith Moses’ parents hid him for three months after he was born, because they saw he was no ordinary child, and they were not afraid of the king’s edict.
Makato meno, wabedo ki yomcwiny i can mogo mapatpat ma opoto i komwa, kun waŋeyo ni bedo ki can kelo diyo cwiny me ciro can, 	Therefore, since we have been justified through faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ,
Ka doŋ gibineno Wod pa dano ka bino ki pol, ki twero madwoŋ, ki deyo. 	“At that time people will see the Son of Man coming in clouds with great power and glory.
Adwoggi me niyewu omiyo wunoŋo larre me tipowu. 	Though you have not seen him, you love him; and even though you do not see him now, you believe in him and are filled with an inexpressible and glorious joy,
Lupur gumako luticce, gugoyo ŋat acel, ki ŋat acel guneko woko, ki mukene gucelo woko ki got. 	When the harvest time approached, he sent his servants to the tenants to collect his fruit.
waat macon 	old relative 
jalle dong orii mada ka pwonno muyembe 	the fellow has taken too long to pick the mangoes
gubako doggi bote kun giwaco ni, “Cwalwa i opego, wek wadony i igi.” 	The demons begged Jesus, “Send us among the pigs; allow us to go into them.”
winyo madit mada dok en gat acel I kom winyi ma cammo ringo keken pa lee ma otoo, giwotto alwak alwak mapol, acut mapol pe gitye ans. ki yer i wiigi nyo nutgi	a vulture is a large bird and it is a bird of prey that lives on eating flesh of dead animals They normally move in large groups, and most vultures have no hair on their heads and neck 
abillo dano ci gunino i ot mape gingeyo komgi	i hypnotized the people and they slept in the house without knowing anything 
pamba man twerro binynye me tol mabecco mada 	this cotton wool can be twisted very well into threads
cwal waraga obis diki 	send the letter to come tomorrow
pe wumi cwinywu obed nwaŋ calo jo ma yam gujemo, i kare ma guomo kwede cwinya i tim, 	do not harden your hearts as you did in the rebellion, during the time of testing in the wilderness,
Pien jo-nu pe gin lukwena kikome, gin lutic ma gibwolo dano, ma gilokke woko ginen calo lukwena pa Kricito. 	And I will keep on doing what I am doing in order to cut the ground from under those who want an opportunity to be considered equal with us in the things they boast about.
Ibiyabo waŋgi wek gua woko ki i colpiny, gubed i ceŋ, gua woko ki i te twer pa Catan, gulokke bot Lubaŋa, wek owek balgi ci gunoŋ kabedo i kin jo ma Lubaŋa olonyogi gudoko jone, pi niyegi i koma.’ 	to open their eyes and turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to God, so that they may receive forgiveness of sins and a place among those who are sanctified by faith in me.’
laber umme gwee 	a beautiful girl has a smelling nose, this means that, the one who is beautiful has some bad things (character, manner, behaviour, etc) therefore one should not look only at the beauty of the girl
cwinynye ngette oyot oyot mada  	he gets annoyed very easily 
gammo ic 	to conceive
lwob agulu magi ngat acel i wii lawotte nio ka oo wa i dan ot 	pile these pots on top of one another until it reaches the ceiling
Ka pud gitye ka lok ki dano, ci ajwagi ki ladit askari me ot pa Lubaŋa ki Lucadukayo gubino botgi, 	The priests and the captain of the temple guard and the Sadducees came up to Peter and John while they were speaking to the people.
myerro ibed dano ma lacir nyo ladii cwiny ka wek iwiny lok pa ladwala maber 	you should be a person who has patience in order to hear well what the stammerer says 
dano ducu ma guwinyo guuro lok ma lukwat gutito botgi. 	and all who heard it were amazed at what the shepherds said to them.
geng dyel pe mit me acamma  	meat from a wasted animal is not nice for eating
bin opiyo piyo, pe igalle kuno 	come quickly, do not delay there
obinno odiko ma ceng pudi katti ni piri 	he came in the morning when the rising sun's ray was still flickering brightly
Guwore, lacen gudwogo i Jerucalem ki yomcwiny madwoŋ, 	While he was blessing them, he left them and was taken up into heaven.
Guwacce ni, “Rwot, miwa kwon meno nino ducu.” 	For the bread of God is the bread that comes down from heaven and gives life to the world.”
Laco myero ocob miti pa dakone, ki dako bene myero ocob miti pa cware. 	The husband should fulfill his marital duty to his wife, and likewise the wife to her husband.
Lubaŋa gamo mot ma dano tye kwede, tekke en obedo ki miti me miyone, ma pe paro gin ma pe etye kwede. 	Now finish the work, so that your eager willingness to do it may be matched by your completion of it, according to your means.
Owaco botgi ni, “Wularo lok aŋo kekenwu kun wutye ka wot-ti?” Gucuŋ ma waŋgi nen ki can. 	but they were kept from recognizing him.
Mumiyo atito botwu tin atyer ni, ka kwo pa ŋat mo i kinwu orwenyo, aliine pe tye i wiya, 	Therefore, I declare to you today that I am innocent of the blood of any of you.
ocitto wa ki latin bene 	he even went with the child 
Dok odok ka lego Lubaŋa, kun nwoyo lego lega acel-lu. 	Once more he went away and prayed the same thing.
ki koko tum, ki dwan ŋat ma tye ka lok. Jo ma guwinyo lokke gubako doggi mada ni pe dok gimed loko botgi lok mo, 	to a trumpet blast or to such a voice speaking words that those who heard it begged that no further word be spoken to them,
pe iroc dokki aye daa ma yang tye i kinwu 	don't reopen the old ngarrel that existed between you
Yam onoŋo Yecu tye ka ryemo cen ma pe loko	Jesus was driving out a demon that was mute
“Ka atyeko dwogo i Jerucalem, ka atye ka lego i ot pa Lubaŋa, awille woko, 	“When I returned to Jerusalem and was praying at the temple, I fell into a trance
Abako doga botwu, utmegina, pi nyiŋ Rwotwa Yecu Kricito, ni wun ducu myero wulok lok acel, apokapoka mo pe myero obed tye i kinwu, ento myero wuribbe i cwiny ki tam acel. 	I appeal to you, brothers and sisters, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that all of you agree with one another in what you say and that there be no divisions among you, but that you be perfectly united in mind and thought.
ocitto ka cunno anyira 	he went to flirt with girls
latin man dok lataggalo mada nen man otwommo agulu ma gliwobbo wii lawotgi ci ooyo onekkongi woko 	this child is really restless and careless, see what he has done, he has knocked pots piled on top of others and broke them 
poto man dong orommo me botte 	this field is now ready to be cultivated
Ka dok omedde oro dano mukene, ci guneko dano meno woko. Gubedo ka keto can i kom jo mapol	He sent still another, and that one they killed
Ento mot me kica ma Lubaŋa omiyo pe rom ki bal pa Adam	Nevertheless, death reigned from the time of Adam to the time of Moses, even over those who did not sin by breaking a command, as did Adam, who is a pattern of the one to come.
Ka doŋ wao i Roma, giye ni Paulo obed i ode kene ki askari ma gwoke. 	When we got to Rome, Paul was allowed to live by himself, with a soldier to guard him.
Pe tye ŋat mo i wi polo, kadi i wi lobo, kadi piny i te lobo ma twero yabo buk adola-ni kadi wa neno iye bene. 	But no one in heaven or on earth or under the earth could open the scroll or even look inside it.
lapiru en aye yamo ma binno matek mada ma retto jami ducu kama owok iye, makko yadi, bayo wii dero nyo ot ma ngoro retto woko piny 	a whirlwind is a very strong wind, which comes with such force that many things across its way are either blown away or thrown down, the trees are blown down the ground, barn's covering are blown away and weak houses are destroyed and pulled down
man agaa? 	who is this? 
Yam tye i Jopa lapwonnye ma dako ma nyiŋe Tabica, ma i leb Grik gilwoŋo ni Dorka, te lokke Lajwa. En yam tiyo tic mabeco mapol mada, dok konyo lucan. 	In Joppa there was a disciple named Tabitha (in Greek her name is Dorcas); she was always doing good and helping the poor.
Ka ce waŋi aye miyo ipoto i bal, ci kol woko	And if your eye causes you to stumble, gouge it out and throw it away
Ka doŋ oo i dye nino madito, Yecu ocito i ot pa Lubaŋa, ocako pwonyo dano. 	But no one would say anything publicly about him for fear of the leaders.
kom motokani ryenynye carro wang dano 	the shining body of the motor car, dazzles people's eyes
en mumiyo myero doŋ wutimme kica, dok wukwe cwinye, wek omi cwercwiny madit mukato kare pe onure woko. 	If anyone has caused grief, he has not so much grieved me as he has grieved all of you to some extent—not to put it too severely.
ento icinyutte bot ajwaka pa Lubaŋa ci ityer mot ma yam Moses ociko pire-ni, wek dano gunen ni ada in kara doŋ icaŋ.” 	Then Jesus said to him, “See that you don’t tell anyone
gin caka pe moko odeyo	crust is not formed when the millet flour is  from the caka
ticce tika twerro cobbe ma nonggo pud caa meeri orommo me kwan 	can the work be finished before your time has come to go to study? 
Lunebi ducu gubedo caden ni, dano ducu ma ye en gibiweko balgi woko pi nyiŋe.” 	All the prophets testify about him that everyone who believes in him receives forgiveness of sins through his name.”
cit ka kwang nino ducu wek ojig kommi 	go to swim every day invigorates you
jalle nenno dano marac macallo lanek	the fellow looks at people viciously like a killer
dakoni lacir lok mada ka inen kit ma cwarre lokko kwede i wiye 	the woman is an obstinate person or showed a great endurance, considering how much her husband overwhelmed her with talks
Ka kono it wacci, “Pien an pe a waŋ, an pe a dul kom,” meno pe geŋe bedo dul kom. 	And if the ear should say, “Because I am not an eye, I do not belong to the body,” it would not for that reason stop being part of the body.
kom ot man twerro puune maber mada 	the walls of this house can be plastered very well
Lujudaya gudokke iye ni, “Koni doŋ waniaŋ ni itye ki cen. Abraim yam oto, ki lunebi bene guto, ento in iwaco ni, ‘Ka ŋat mo mako lokka, ci pe bibilo to matwal’. 	Very truly I tell you, whoever obeys my word will never see death.”
gimiyo kabuto ducu ma pat pat 	they were given separate rooms
kel nyor me tweyo agura gura 	bring the chain for tying the horse 
dakone nywal maber nino ducu 	she always has normal deliveries
tye ka wirro yat moni wek komme obokke woko	she is smearing her body with a certain medicine so that her body may become brown 
Yecu ogamo doggi ni, “Adada awacciwu ni, ma Abraim pud pe, onoŋo doŋ an atye.” 	“You are not yet fifty years old,” they said to him, “and you have seen Abraham!”
lapena tye i goga 	the pigeon peas are in the barn 
jany piny kany kany	sit here for the moment 
jemmo me kwerro citto ka kwan pe koynnyo pien gin litino aye mape ginoggo pwony 	striking against going to study is of no use because it is they the children who will miss being taught
lokke winynye maber 	the word is audible, that is, it is heard well 
Mon bene kit meno, myero gubed mon ma romo awora, ma pe lucok dog dano, gubed jo ma gwokke kengi dok jo ma lugen i jami ducu. 	They must keep hold of the deep truths of the faith with a clear conscience.
tung pii omol woko  	open the water to flow out
gerro pa ladit tic en aye okello teg wic pa lutic 	cruelity of the headman of the work made the workers disobedient
dok omine twer me ŋolo kop, pien en Wod pa dano. 	For as the Father has life in himself, so he has granted the Son also to have life in himself.
Okot dong dano ma lamal ata pe tye ki gin mo matiyo wacel 	Okot is now a vagabond who roams about without any work to do
wotte bibeddo awene? 	when will his journey be? 
lar latin can ma opotto i pii ma dong tye ka muny woko ni 	rescue that child who has fallen into the water who is about to drown 
Atye ki tyen lok ma miyo awakke i Kricito Yecu pi ticca ma atye ka tiyone pi Lubaŋa. 	Yet I have written you quite boldly on some points to remind you of them again, because of the grace God gave me
I kare ma doŋ alokke, ci aneno okar-mac me jabu abiro	And when I turned I saw seven golden lampstands,
gudaŋŋe ni, “Yecu, Ladit, timwa kica.” 	and called out in a loud voice, “Jesus, Master, have pity on us!”
lagwar yugi kany tin ocitto kwene? 	bring for me a rake for collecting the weeds 
dyangi tye i olet 	the cattle are in the pasture or on the grazing ground
“Guŋamo doggi calo lyel ma twolo, kun giloko lok mamit me bwolo dano.” “Lok ma giloko obedo calo kwir pa ororo.” 	there is no one who understands; there is no one who seeks God.
enoba Iabwor dong binnocaa 	look out the lion is coming there
Pien ka ma jo aryo nyo adek gucokke kacel i nyiŋa, an bene noŋo atye kunnu i kingi.” 	For where two or three gather in my name, there am I with them.”
cit ento timme maber 	go but behave yourself
Cwinywa yom ka wagoro ma noŋo wun wutek, dok walego piwu ni wudok jo muteggi. 	For we cannot do anything against the truth, but only for the truth.
pit tek mada	feeding is very difficult(costly)
kel canduk madit me nyonyo me torro iye jammi 	bring a trunk for packing things into
nyog piny ka wek inen  	squat down in order to see
an abolo lok me caden i koma kena, dok Wora ma oora bene cadenna.” 	You judge by human standards; I pass judgment on no one.
bor pa gut rii miyo en cammo pot yadi wa i 	because of giraffe's long neck, it makes it eat leaves of trees from their tops 
wino dyang gitiyo kwedde mada me cikko ki winyo, ki yibbe acel giyubbo beddo gin ma dano madit makko wotto kwedde 	the tattles hair is used for making bird traps, and one whole tail is made into a thing which some important persons hold as a sign of honour
pien lok ma wabedo ka titone i kom Yecu Kricito odonyo matek i iwu. 	God thus confirming our testimony about Christ among you.
Yecu odokke iye ni, “An a en ma loko kwedi-ni.” 	When he comes, he will explain everything to us.”
twommo tyenne i kom ajut 	knocking his foot against the stump of a tree
gwok tye ka gweyo  	the dog is barking
myel wunu myel me gol  	dance the dance where the hands are hooked together
adwii jo maraccu mada, ginekko ludito ki litino ducu mape giparro	the terrorists are very bad people because they kill both old and young people as well as children without minding about it
dano gupwodde tin mada 	the people beat each other very much today
poyo wiye pi nino meere me wot 	reminding him of the day of his journey 
agoga en aye tukko me yommo twiny dano 	comedy is a play for pleasing the people
“Wubineno can, wun lutel dano ma waŋwu oto, ma wuwaco ni, ‘Ka ce dano mo kwoŋo kwoŋ ki ot pa Lubaŋa, lok mo bedo pe iye, ento ka ŋat mo okwoŋo kwoŋ ki jabu ma i ot pa Lubaŋa, kwoŋŋe-ni bimake gire.’ 	“Woe to you, teachers of the law and Pharisees, you hypocrites! You travel over land and sea to win a single convert, and when you have succeeded, you make them twice as much a child of hell as you are.
kwok tye ka jibbo i wangge  	the beads of sweat are coming out on his face
Ento ka wudonyo i gaŋ mo, ce pe gijolowu, ci wucit i waŋayo me gaŋ meno, wuwac ni, 	But when you enter a town and are not welcomed, go into its streets and say,
latinne la ngaa mada 	the child is very stubborn 
Man otimme tyen adek, ci jami meno gidwoko woko i polo. 	This happened three times, and then it was all pulled up to heaven again.
miiwa cam 	give us food 
yenynyo lok macon 	searching for old stories
Inane twerro bkide ci dokko ma yom 	the hide can be softened by soaking in water 
Kumeno Wod pa dano aye rwot me cabit.”	So the Son of Man is Lord even of the Sabbath.”
piyo lawotti me matto taa 	to induce your friend to smoke
opuny tyenne okak 	the heels of his feet are cracked 
lok ducu ma Yecu olokko me larowa ki bet catan, ginongo i Jiri 	all the words that Jesus said to save us from the Satan, can be found in The New Testament
gin ranynye mada pi kara ki kare 	they make fool or fun of each other from time to time
ologo obeddo macallo opoko ma lac kong kwoggo peg iye ki i is kuno ka lacen dong gilayo woko 	bladder is like a gourd bottle where the urine is first collected and then later it is passed out
pot yadi dong tye ka lwer woko 	the leaves of the trees are falling off or are being shed off 
dotto dano atata pe konyno 	to keep on accusing the people, does not help 
mwoc okayo dako 	labour pain has started
Apwoyo ŋat ma omiya teko me tiyo tic man, en Kricito Yecu Rwotwa, pien doŋ okwana me bedo lagen, ka oketa bene i ticce, 	that conforms to the gospel concerning the glory of the blessed God, which he entrusted to me.
Kit dano macalo meno myero pe otam ni ebinoŋo gin mo ki bot Rwot, 	That person should not expect to receive anything from the Lord.
wi latek bedo payo	the strong man's head is full of scars
mutoka opotto i pii ci otwoorro nyim ma otinggo i pii 	the car overturned and threw all the simsim it was carrying into the water
opotto ogoyo wiye woko ni taar i kom nom 	he fell and hit his head very hard on the ground
abwolle ni an pe aebeddo gang pien onongo yella mada ni emitti ebin botta	I deceived him that I was not staying at home because he was troubling me very much that he wants to come to me
gam wello ka gubino  	receive or welcome the guests when they come
Gin dok gupenye ni, “Myero watim gin aŋo wek wati tic pa Lubaŋa?” 	For on him God the Father has placed his seal of approval.”
ringo man twerro tedde maber 	this meat can be well cooked
pi tito lok me ada, ki pi tek pa Lubaŋa. Doŋ wamako jami lweny me kit ma atir i ciŋwa ryoryo, tuŋ lacuc ki tuŋ lacam. 	in beatings, imprisonments and riots; in hard work, sleepless nights and hunger;
obwollo laremme owekko opotto i bal	he deceived his friend and made him get into trouble
tanggo cingge pi kony 	extends and supinates his hand for help
pien Won Twer Ducu otima gin madit, nyiŋe bene leŋ. 	for the Mighty One has done great things for me—holy is his name.
en pe oo kany jik  	he does not come here at all
“Cwinywu owek ŋabbe aŋaba	The Father loves the Son and has placed everything in his hands.
tye ka kwoyo cati pa latinne ma oyec 	he is stitching up a torn shirt of his child
wek wuribbe ka pako Lubaŋa Won Rwotwa Yecu Kricito ki dwan acel. 	For everything that was written in the past was written to teach us, so that through the endurance taught in the Scriptures and the encouragement they provide we might have hope.
piyo latin ni ongoo lawotte 	to persuade the child to beat his friend
I nino mukwoŋo me nino madito me Mugati ma Tobi Pe Iye, lupwonnye gubino bot Yecu, ci gupenye ni, “Imito waciyubbi kabedo kwene wek icam iye cam me Kato?” 	On the first day of the Festival of Unleavened Bread, the disciples came to Jesus and asked, “Where do you want us to make preparations for you to eat the Passover?”
aol woko LI lok ma ipwonynya kwedde, pe doll amitto wacel 	I am tired of your advice, I do not like it any more
Ento ka pud peya giye pi yomcwiny, kun giuro, owaco botgi ni, “Wutye ki gin mo kany me acama?” 	When he had said this, he showed them his hands and feet.
Yecu odokke iye ni, “Too tye ki boro, winyo me polo tye ki odigi, ento Wod pa dano pe tye ki ka ma myero epyel iye wiye.” 	Jesus replied, “Foxes have dens and birds have nests, but the Son of Man has no place to lay his head.”
gin angoo ma otimme mamiyo inen marac twatwal? 	what has happened that makes you look so miserable?  
cati pamba gigic doki kweyo kom 	the cotton shirts are cool and so cool the body 
Ento teko pa Caulo omedde ameda, omiyo lewic omako Lujudaya ma gibedo i Damaciko, pien en onyuto atir ni Yecu en aye Kricito ma Lubaŋa oyero. 	Yet Saul grew more and more powerful and baffled the Jews living in Damascus by proving that Jesus is the Messiah.
kwayaaye gitye ka wer 	the choir are the ones who are singing
olokko tokke botte 	he turned his back to him 
ka ojenynyo bade ma odollo otwegge, gatti mo pe twerro tellone dokko atir 	when he tightens his flexed elbow, no one can pull it straight
opotto tyen gkiii i peny? 	how many times has he failed in the examinations? 
okok pe tye ki byene, gilak ataa, gicammo jami ducu ma gunoggo ma rommo acamma 	these small termites have no anthill, they move about eating anything that they find
nonggo yat manyen pe yot 	discovering a new drug is not easy
lim ma gimiyo me layab dong marrow wek olok i keny 	money paid for the mother of the girl to open her mouth to speak during marriage negotiation 
lacoo ne twoo dok yello twatwal	the man always gets attacks of illness
ka idag gin mo pe konynyo me jakko lok ajaka iye, wac atir ni adaggi 	if you don't like something ,do not speak arrogantly about it, simply say I do not want it
moko anyogi en aye i kare man cam pa dano mapol mada 	maize flour is now the staple food of many people
ladit kanica 	a priest
nino ducu maarro gerro odigi i wii odi pa dano 	the sparrows always build their nests in the man's houses 
pe ingul laa kany  	do not spit here
oluma jubi 	head bull of a buffalo herd
In pe imota kun inoto lema, ento cakke i kare ma adonyo i ot, en pe oweko noto tyena. 	You did not give me a kiss, but this woman, from the time I entered, has not stopped kissing my feet.
“Pe wukan lonyo piwu kenwu i lobo, ka ma nyenye ki nyal gibalo woko, dok ka ma lukwo gibino gituro ot ci gikwalo woko. 	But when you fast, put oil on your head and wash your face,
otweyo panne ayol 	he tied his pair of trousers loosely
tunggo latin ki cam	to stuff the child with food
otweyo yea ni rit  	he tied the wood tightly
liyo pii me amatta 	filtering the water through a sieve for drinking
pworra mo manok 	give me some 
ceng ma oryeny matek twatwali en aye omiyo wang it dong tye ka cwiny woko 	the long period of hot sun is responsible for the drying up of the well 
Lacoc coyo lok pa Lubaŋa. 	The farmer sows the word.
Wonne mo pe, minne-gu pe, kwarine bene pe, acakki me karene, kadi wa agikki me kwone bene pe. En obedo cal ki Wod pa Lubaŋa, obedo ajwaka nakanaka. 	Without father or mother, without genealogy, without beginning of days or end of life, resembling the Son of God, he remains a priest forever.
I kare ma doŋ gitye ka lor piny ki i wi got, Yecu ocikogi ni, “Pe wutit bot dano mo gin ma wuneno, nio waŋ ma Wod pa dano ocer ki i kin jo muto.” 	When they looked up, they saw no one except Jesus.
libbo pii i kulu ki agwata wek pe gitwom daba 	scooping the water with gourd cup in order to avoid collecting mud
nyako ma lawirre ata nong go malaya 	a girl who roams about is a prostitute
nyebbo litino marac ki cammo ringo keken 	familiarising children badly in eating only meat 
pwod latin pi gin ma en oballo 	cane the child for the bad thing he has done 
jeggo leela i kom ot 	leaning the bicycle against the wall of a house
lut en aye odoo macek ma giturro ki i kom jang yat me goyo litino 	lut is a short stick which is broken from a twig of a tree for caning children
dano myerro cwallo lagam ka gicoone waraga 	a person should reply to a letter written to him 
ka ngati oyetti caa lokke woko 	if anybody abuses you, ignore it 
“Utmego, lok ma yam gicoyo myero ocobbe kakare, macalo yam Cwiny Maleŋ oloko ki i dog Daudi i kom Juda ma otelo wi jo ma gumako Yecu ca. 	and said, “Brothers and sisters, the Scripture had to be fulfilled in which the Holy Spirit spoke long ago through David concerning Judas, who served as guide for those who arrested Jesus.
lok odye odye pe konynyo dano 	speaking again and then again on the same thing does not help anybody
Ento Yecu odok iye ni, “Pe wugeŋe, pien ŋat ma pe lakworwu, noŋo tye tuŋ botwu.” 	“Do not stop him,” Jesus said, “for whoever is not against you is for you.”
latin ma ngeyo coc ber mada 	a child who knows how to write is very good 
en lalok lok agec twatwal	he always backbites people in his talk
yetto dano pe ber 	abusing or insulting the people is not good
nen ngeyi ka mutoka moo pee ka dong igak idok tung lacam ka wek pee wuyokke ki mutoka mukene 	look back to see if no another car is coming and then turn left in order to avoid collision with another car
nyog laa 	rumple or crumple the leather 
Odikke koŋ kunnu, ka lacen dok oa olimo kabedo ducu ma i lobo Galatia ki Perugia kun jiŋo cwiny lupwonnye ducu. 	After spending some time in Antioch, Paul set out from there and traveled from place to place throughout the region of Galatia and Phrygia, strengthening all the disciples.
pud ocitto ka konynye 	he went to help himself 
Ka dok olego aye, omiyo kot ocako cwer, lobo oceko cam mabup. 	Again he prayed, and the heavens gave rain, and the earth produced its crops.
latin obutto oryebbe piny caa 	the child is sleeping on his abdomen there
gadigi pud gitye meggi ka panne atata, kadi wa latin ot otuc  	so and so is still wandering about, even a small little but he has not yet built
rad kom ot ki coka 	throw chalk all over the house 
Jon odok iye ni, “Dano pe twero noŋo gin mo pire kene, ka pe gimiye nia ki i polo. 	They came to John and said to him, “Rabbi, that man who was with you on the other side of the Jordan—the one you testified about—look, he is baptizing, and everyone is going to him.”
Agamo ni, ‘In aŋa, Rwot?’ Ci Rwot owaco ni, ‘An aye Yecu ma itye ka yela-ni. 	“Then I asked, ‘Who are you, Lord?’ “ ‘I am Jesus, whom you are persecuting,’ the Lord replied.
en ononggo gammo ni ngoo? 	how did he respond?
tyen meja ogwet woko 	the leg of the table has slipped out of place 
dako ma gukko nywal	the woman who gets pregnancy before weaning the preceding child
pakko jamine	adoring his properties
pee dyel iter kama ginekko lye dyegi 	pull along the goat to the slaughter house
Lamalaika owacce ni, ‘Pe ilwor, Maliam pien ilimo pwoc ki bot Lubaŋa. 	But the angel said to her, “Do not be afraid, Mary; you have found favor with God.
ngaa mape ngeyo puggo dong candukke maber? 	who does not know how to lock his box well? 
rweny kwedde woko 	could not remember him, or forgot him, or did not recognise him 
cukari lim mada miyo litino gimaarro twatwal 	sugar is very sweet, that is, why the children love it very much
Kadi wa gin ma pe ki kwo, ma kok calo nyamulere nyo naŋa, ka ce dwane pe owinnye maber, ci dano gibiniaŋ niŋniŋ i wer ma gikuto nyo gigoyo? 	Even in the case of lifeless things that make sounds, such as the pipe or harp, how will anyone know what tune is being played unless there is a distinction in the notes?
lapwopwo gitye ka tuk ni piri piri 	the butterflies are flying all around
twoddo dyegi woko i otgi ki odiko con	to surround the goats in their sleeping place early in the morning
Lok meno ducu odoko labol botwa, ma cikowa ni pe myero wabed ka paro gin maraco macalo yam gin guparo. 	Now these things occurred as examples to keep us from setting our hearts on evil things as they did.
borre ki lacce ki borre ma odok malo ducu gubedo rom. 	He measured the city with the rod and found it to be 12,000 stadia in length, and as wide and high as it is long.
binno ka limowa 	coming to visit us
opotto ci opwacco um conge woko 	he fell and got laceration of his knee
kado twerro pworre i dek 	the salt can be sprinkled into the sauce 
dyewor jo mukene pe gkiiyo mac mataar ma i nyim mutoka meegi ci wekko caarro wang dano magitye ka binno ki i nyimgi 	at night, some people do not dim their car headlights and as a result the light dazzles the eyes of the people in the on coming car
yokko yoo ayokka ci dwoggo cen 	going and returning back
ci Lubaŋa won kuc bibedo kwedwu. 	Whatever you have learned or received or heard from me, or seen in me—put it into practice
puc me kom ot man pe ber 	the plastering of this house is not good 
wakke pe ber, pe teerri bene kamo 	being proud is not good, it does not also take you anywhere
onoŋo awinyo ka giwaco welgi. 	I heard their number.
nen mono gin ma itimmo 	look at what you have done
Ento lupwonnye mukene gubino i yeya, kun giywayo obwo ma opoŋ ki rec, pien onoŋo pe gibor ki wi tera, mito romo tyen miya acel. 	Then the disciple whom Jesus loved said to Peter, “It is the Lord!” As soon as Simon Peter heard him say, “It is the Lord,” he wrapped his outer garment around him (for he had taken it off) and jumped into the water.
Ka gitye ka tere doŋ woko, ci gimako Cimon, dano mo me Cirene ma onoŋo donyo i gaŋ kun oa ki i kin paco, gucibo yatariya i kome, wek otiŋ, olub ki kor Yecu. 	As the soldiers led him away, they seized Simon from Cyrene, who was on his way in from the country, and put the cross on him and made him carry it behind Jesus.
jami me pa agaa?  	whose things are these?
nyako anyenna ma gitye ka ribbe i kanica omakko ature mabecco mada ma giriyo kacel 	during the wedding, the bride held a very beautiful bouquet of flowers 
Gin yam gutito botwu ni, “I kare me agikki luŋala bibedo tye, ma gibilubo mitigi keken, ma pe gilworo Lubaŋa.” 	But, dear friends, remember what the apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ foretold.
bataniya me kare man dong obeddo cucu cucu 	the present blankets are velvety
um latin oluk  	the child has thick mucus coming out of his nose
Lubanga tye i wii polo 	God is in heaven 
Pien kare meno bibedo kare me culo kwor, ki cobo lok ducu ma yam gicoyo. 	For this is the time of punishment in fulfillment of all that has been written.
gin guaa ka kwang 	they have come from swimming 
latin tye ka mullo 	the child is crawling 
I kin jo ma yam gucito ka woro Lubaŋa i nino madit onoŋo jo mogo Lugrik. 	Many people, because they had heard that he had performed this sign, went out to meet him.
ocikko lumony ni myero diki gubin con 	he commanded or ordered the army to come very early tomorrow 
oguro pire tek mada i kin joo Baganda omiyo won ot nyo dano madit en aye cammo 	among the Baganda gizzard is a very important thing and that is why it is the father or a big person who eats it 
ka yece onywalo kabaka Daudi. 	and Jesse the father of King David
Dok owaco bot dano ducu ni, “Ka dano mo mito lubo kora, myero okwoŋ kwerre kekene, otiŋ yatariyane nino ducu, ci olub ki kora. 	Then he said to them all: “Whoever wants to be my disciple must deny themselves and take up their cross daily and follow me.
wangge leng mada 	she is very beautiful, attractive 
tong gweno oloyo menya	menya failed to get an egg
pacco dek 	to take a good amount of food with fingers
man en aye dong karre ma acil lum oo kwedde	this is the time when the sharp seeds of this special grass fall
pacowu tye ning ning? 	how is your home? 
tye ka mallo ringo oyot oyot wek ludito gucam ma pud peya gucakko ka larro lokgi 	she is frying the meat quickly for the elders to eat before they start their discussions 
Lupwonnye pa Jon ki pa Luparicayo onoŋo gitye ka ri kec	Now John’s disciples and the Pharisees were fasting
Jo ma lwoko ginarukagi wek gibed ki twero me camo nyig yat me kwo, ki me donyo i gaŋ ma noŋo giwok ki i dogcel, jo-nu aye tye ki gum. 	“Blessed are those who wash their robes, that they may have the right to the tree of life and may go through the gates into the city.
cad woko kwica pe i ot 	pass the loose stool outside there not in the house
tiny pulle oyot oyot wek wamwod 	rub off quickly the red skin of the groundnuts so that we may eat it
nyodo ber 	giving birth is good 
Pien mar pa Kricito loyo kwowa, pien doŋ waŋolo kop kit man ni, ŋat acel oto pi jo ducu, meno mumiyo jo ducu doŋ guto. 	We are not trying to commend ourselves to you again, but are giving you an opportunity to take pride in us, so that you can answer those who take pride in what is seen rather than in what is in the heart.
lacat wil oa ka catto jami ne 	a trader came from selling his Areas
Konyo matek i yo ducu. Mukwoŋo, Lujudaya yam gimiyo botgi lok pa Lubaŋa ma pire tek kun gigenogi ni gibigwoko. 	What advantage, then, is there in being a Jew, or what value is there in circumcision?
Litinona, pud dok atye ka ciro arem kwedwu macalo dako ciro arem i kare me nywal, nio ka kit pa Kricito ocwene i iwu. 	It is fine to be zealous, provided the purpose is good, and to be so always, not just when I am with you.
Nen, nia tin yalwak me kare ducu gibilwoŋa ni lagumkom	From now on all generations will call me blessed,
en naka ononggo pe ocitto kuno kadi obeddo ka pyem pirre twatwal 	he did not really go there though he was arguing strongly about it
Pilato openye ni, “Pe iwinyo kit lwak adot mapol ma gidoti kwede-ni?” 	When he was accused by the chief priests and the elders, he gave no answer.
Doŋ macalo waŋeyo ni Rwot myero gilwor, watemo ywayo tam pa dano, ma kitwa nen woko ka maleŋ bot Lubaŋa	For we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, so that each of us may receive what is due us for the things done while in the body, whether good or bad.
Wubed lukica macalo wunwu lakica. 	Be merciful, just as your Father is merciful.
iwacci ngoo? 	with what?,
nyoggo laa nio ka odokko ma yom	to rumple and to crumple until the leather becomes soft
larro dano ma opotto i pii 	to rescue rescuing a person who has fallen into the water 
Gin ducu gucamo guyeŋ	Then he took the seven loaves and the fish, and when he had given thanks, he broke them and gave them to the disciples, and they in turn to the people.
Yecu onoŋo yam tye ka lega i kabedo mo	One day Jesus was praying in a certain place
gutonggo gut gweno ni tap 	they cut the fowl's neck in one blow
jon ni ducu gucok keeno 	there they have gathered there
min bul 	the big drum 
giwora nono, pwony ma gipwonyo obedo pwony ma mako kit pa dano.’ 	They worship me in vain; their teachings are merely human rules.’
ajullu latin man ki tek mada omiyo kwoo	I looked after this child with great determination that is why he is alive
Pien bal onoŋo kare odonyo i cik, obwola, ka doŋ oneka woko. 	I found that the very commandment that was intended to bring life actually brought death.
Wabako dogwa botwu utmegiwa, wuwor jo ma tye ka tic i kinwu ma gicanne piwu i Rwot, kun gipwonyowu. 	Now we ask you, brothers and sisters, to acknowledge those who work hard among you, who care for you in the Lord and who admonish you.
dako ma ngirro lok twatwal ka mitto gin me 	a woman who persistently asks for something when she wants something
Pe wuŋol kop pi neno ki waŋ, ento wuŋol kop atir.” 	Now if a boy can be circumcised on the Sabbath so that the law of Moses may not be broken, why are you angry with me for healing a man’s whole body on the Sabbath?
tye ka petto kolo me beddo ki welo 	she is spreading the papyrus mat for the visitors to sit on
Adada, niye bino pi winyo lok ma gitito, lok ma giwinyo a i lok ma gitito i kom Kricito. 	For Isaiah says, “Lord, who has believed our message?”
peny Okot maber nen callo en tye ka mow lok 	ask Okot very carefully, it appears as though he is hiding something
Melkijedek man yam obedo kabaka me Calem, dok bene ajwaka pa Lubaŋa Mamalo Twal. 	This Melchizedek was king of Salem and priest of God Most High
Ka doŋ giwacca ni, “In myero doki itit lok pa Lubaŋa, i kom lwak dano mapatpat ki rok ki leb ki luker ducu.”	Then I was told, “You must prophesy again about many peoples, nations, languages and kings.”
gipoko pyer ngwen	the two friends share the white ant
acekere mukene pe gingeyo riyo arokile maber 	constables do not know how to wind the puttees around their lefts
cwinynye nwang ka citto pien Iworro ni gwok nyo gicirom ki adwii 	he is unwilling to go because he is afraid that perhaps he may meet with the guerrillas
Aŋa i kinwu ma won latin, ma ka latinne olege ni omiye kwon, ci bimiye gweŋ? 	For everyone who asks receives; the one who seeks finds; and to the one who knocks, the door will be opened.
Gubedo ka laro lok i kingi kekengi kun giwaco ni, “Pe wakelo mugati.” 	They discussed this among themselves and said, “It is because we didn’t bring any bread.”
ngom man twerro lungge maber mada 	this clay can be be made round into balls 
rocco lok 	revising the evidence
latwoo bene dong wotto maber	the patient is also now walking well 
Ka guo i rwom me ito malo, lumony gutiŋo Paulo atiŋa pi gero pa lwak, 	When Paul reached the steps, the violence of the mob was so great he had to be carried by the soldiers.
wore, ticce miyo kom dano nudde oyot oyot mada 	the work wears out the people very quickly 
Ka oo i kabedo meno, ci owaco botgi ni, “Wuleg Lubaŋa, wek pe wudony i abita mo.” 	On reaching the place, he said to them, “Pray that you will not fall into temptation.”
komme ocoyo-coyo  	its body is striped
muranga dong iye ka nyurro 	the beans are now germinating
Kombeddi acuŋ kany ka pido koppa pi geno cikke ma Lubaŋa omiyo bot kwarowa, 	And now it is because of my hope in what God has promised our ancestors that I am on trial today.
nyaarro boo 	cutting the cowpeas' leaves into small pieces or slices for cooking 
Leb en aye gin ma wapwoyo kwede Rwot Lubaŋa Wonwa, en leb acel-lu bene waceno kwede dano ma giketogi i cal pa Lubaŋa. 	With the tongue we praise our Lord and Father, and with it we curse human beings, who have been made in God’s likeness.
cwinynye tye ka lem 	he is feeling like vomiting, nauseating or sick
wee dyang 	content of stomach of cattle
dano ducu ka gibutto myerro gubut i lak nget 	all people, when they are sleeping, they should sleep on the sides
Pien ginacoya waco bot Parao ni, “Atiŋi malo pi lok man wek omi anyut tekona i komi, wek nyiŋa oywek i wi lobo ducu.” 	It does not, therefore, depend on human desire or effort, but on God’s mercy.
Jo mogo ma ceŋ gioro nia i kin Luparicayo 	John replied in the words of Isaiah the prophet, “I am the voice of one calling in the wilderness, ‘Make straight the way for the Lord.’”
lwangi mokko mada i obworo pyen 	the flies do get caught very often in the cobwebs 
tet ira tonggi adek 	forge for me three spears 
Ŋat acel i kin lupwonnyene, en Anderiya omin Cimon Petero, owacce ni, 	Philip answered him, “It would take more than half a year’s wages to buy enough bread for each one to have a bite!”
opegogi tye ka jukke ki daba	the pigs are wallowing themselves in the mud
Wudwog cen i tam ma atir ma pe me mero, ci wugik bal woko cut. Pien jo mogo pe gitye ki ŋec mo i kom Lubaŋa. Awaco man wek lewic omakwu. 	Come back to your senses as you ought, and stop sinning; for there are some who are ignorant of God—I say this to your shame.
remmo lok me mung i nyim kacokke	letting out a very important secret to the assembly 
tekko waragi i gilac 	pouring waragi in glasses in equal proportion
lacoc maber tye kwene ma twerro coyo gin ma walokkoni? 	where is a good writer who can write what we have just talked about or discussed are talking about or discussing?
okanno limme i bege 	he saved his money in the bank
Jo mapol i kin lwak gupeto boŋŋigi i dye yo, ki jo mogo gutoŋo jaŋ yadi gupeto i dye yo. 	They brought the donkey and the colt and placed their cloaks on them for Jesus to sit on.
ryem woko ki i tic  	dismiss him from work
Guwaco bot dako ni, “Koni pe waye pi lokki keken, pien wawinyo giwa ki itwa, doŋ watyeko niaŋ ni, ada dano man en Lalar me lobo.” 	And because of his words many more became believers.
guti me lokgi tye kwene me larro ngom man? 	where is the base of their argument for contesting for this land?
pur pe gin ma yot, ka pe kiiyo cwinynyi matek, pe itwerro purro poto madit 	cultivation is not an easy thing, if you are not determined, you cannot cultivate a big field
un me tic geggogi cweyo 	overwork prevents them from being fat 
litino gucitto ka makko rec i kulo 	the children went to fish in the river
kella cam mo 	bring me some food
kella madara me nenno wang 	bring me a looking glass
mon myero guliŋ woko litik ka gitye i kacokke. Pien pe giyegi me lok	Women should remain silent in the churches
omiyo Lujudaya guwaco bot dano ma gicaŋo ni, “tin cabit, cik pe ye ni ikwany gibutoni.” 	The day on which this took place was a Sabbath,
lung cak ma odong i kikopo ni i donggi 	turn the remaining milk in the cup into your mouth, but here it means, finish the remaining milk in the cup by drinking it
Pien ka gin ma yam orwenyo woko obino ki deyo, gin ma ri myero doŋ obed ki deyo makato. 	For what was glorious has no glory now in comparison with the surpassing glory.
wek gin aye gubin gugonywa pigi kengi.” 	And now do they want to get rid of us quietly? No! Let them come themselves and escort us out.”
kikopo giyai 	the cups are brittle and so break easily
yoone wotto rabbe ki i nget cukul 	the road goes round the school
timmo gin ma kitmeno meddo pekko 	doing such things brings more problem 
kel igi kany 	bring it for them here
Yam wunoŋo gin aŋo i gin ma lewicce kombeddi tye ka makowu-ni? Agikki pa jami macalo meno ducu aye to. 	When you were slaves to sin, you were free from the control of righteousness.
Yecu ka obedo piny i wi got Jeituni, kun otikke ki ot pa Lubaŋa, ci Petero ki Yakobo ki Jon ki Anderiya gucako penye i muŋ ni, 	As Jesus was sitting on the Mount of Olives opposite the temple, Peter, James, John and Andrew asked him privately,
coo mitto anyira ma bocco ma igi onat	the men like tall girls with flat slim
latinne pud peya ngeyo gweyo dek maber	the child does not yet know how to scoop the food very well 
Pien wun ducu wubedo jo me ceŋ, jo me dyeceŋ	You are all children of the light and children of the day
opici meerri dong jami oket lye ata 	in your office things are scattered all over
beddo ki tam pe rac	to be with an idea is not bad
Gudok iye botgi ni, “Rwot aye mito.” 	They replied, “The Lord needs it.”
pien wan pe watwero weko tito pi gin ma yam waneno ki ma wawinyo.” 	As for us, we cannot help speaking about what we have seen and heard.”
tikko yoo acel keken	to follow only one way
mutoka meera yella mada, twora meeri doki giber ber 	my car is bothering me very much but yours is slightly better 
lacwii me cwiiyo remo kama rem	a horn for sucking the blood from the spot where there is much pain on the body
ratili adii me kado matye i gunia man 	how many pounds (weight) of salt are in this bag? 
Godfrey dong owekko pwony woko odonynyo i politik 	Godfrey has left teaching and has joined politics
it latin man opong ki ogodo keken 	this child's ears are full of wax 
latebere maarro twii i poto ma nonggo dong gipurro iye pi karre malac ma dong otii woko 	this succulent plant germinates and grows in an old field that has been cultivated many times for a long time and it is now overused
cuddo lee madong gicubbo 	to spear and to kill the animal which is dying which was speared before
ento kombeddi doŋ obedo piny i kabedo me deyo yo tuŋ acuc me komker pa Lubaŋa. 	For the joy set before him he endured the cross, scorning its shame, and sat down at the right hand of the throne of God.
Ajwaka madit otirre malo ci ocuŋ i dyere, ocako penyo Yecu ni, “Lwak adot ma lucaden gudoti kwede-ni in igamo niŋniŋ?” 	Then the high priest stood up before them and asked Jesus, “Are you not going to answer? What is this testimony that these men are bringing against you?”
tongo ngut gweno woko ni tup 	he cut the neck of the chicken with one stroke
macalo kit pa ajwagi tye, kwir okwanye me donyo i ot pa Rwot ka waŋo gitye woko ka lega i cawa me waŋo odok eceta. 	he was chosen by lot, according to the custom of the priesthood, to go into the temple of the Lord and burn incense.
latin dong oteggi 	the child is now fully grown up to look after himself
arkii gikwoyo bene me tayi ki me cuti 	the silk is also made into ties and suits 
tyen komme lege-lege koni poto woko ka ibeddo lye	the chair's legs are not fixed it may collapse if you sit on it
Yecu owaco botgi ni, “Apenyowu ni, i ceŋ cabit cik ye ni gitim iye gin maber, nyo gin marac, gilaro iye kwo nyo gineko woko?” 	Then Jesus said to them, “I ask you, which is lawful on the Sabbath: to do good or to do evil, to save life or to destroy it?”
ladit ogoyo laa ki litino ma gicitto ka dwar wek gunek lee mapol dok bene gin mo pe otimgi marac 	the old man blessed the boys who were going to hunt, so that they may kill many animals and nothing should hurt them
ci oloko kare malac nio wa i cwiny dyewor. 	Paul spoke to the people and, because he intended to leave the next day, kept on talking until midnight.
nyaani man myerro watim angoo? 	what must we do now? 
Ka piny doŋ oru, lukwaŋ pe guŋeyo lobo ma guo iye, ento guneno gul nam ma kweyo tye iye ci gutamo ni ka twerre myero gikel mel i dog tura kunnu. 	When daylight came, they did not recognize the land, but they saw a bay with a sandy beach, where they decided to run the ship aground if they could.
Petero dok okwero woko kun kwoŋŋe akwoŋa ni, “An gira pe aŋeyo dano-ni.” 	He denied it again, with an oath: “I don’t know the man!”
oteggo ngwec matek mada 	he ran off or took off at a very high speed or he showed a clean pair of heels
nywarro dano pe ber 	to scorn people is not good 
tonggo dano nano 	false accusation of a person
Ento Petero owacci, “Pe atye ki lim mo, ento amii gin ma atye kwede	Then Peter said, “Silver or gold I do not have, but what I do have I give you
pi meno ket tek iŋut woko. 	So be earnest and repent.
yweerro pii ki i wii meja ki cing 	removing the water from the table with hands 
icitto kunno ci inoggo gin angoo? 	you went there and then what did you find? 
kal monone eno 	that is his reserve millet for hard times
Wubol latic ma konnye pe-ni i colpiny ma tye woko, ka ma dano gibikok kun gikayo iye lakgi.’ 	And throw that worthless servant outside, into the darkness, where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.’
tidu odillgo tyenne tung lacam 	he has numbness in his left leg 
Cakke i cawa abicel, piny ocido woko macol i lobo ducu, nio wa i cawa aboŋwen. 	In the same way the rebels who were crucified with him also heaped insults on him.
dyang mokko puno 	the cows eat the salted earth near the river 
nyal makko nyonyo mapol ka pe gijwayogi jwi jwi nyo kare ki kare 	many metals become easily rusty, if they are not polished frequently or from time to time
obur tuwa tye wa i loka kulu Atiyabar 	our very old home used to be on the other side of river Atiyabar 
kel binika wek gitii iye cai 	bring the teapot so that tea may be put into it 
gin angoo ma otimme oweko dong can man ogele? 	what happened to make the brim of this plate break? 
Ento Yecu ogamo doge ni, “Nyeri, aŋa ma oketa me bedo laŋolkop ki lapok jamiwu?” 	Jesus replied, “Man, who appointed me a judge or an arbiter between you?”
winyo madit mada, ma tyenne bocco ki gutte bene bor mada pe tuk ento rig go madwir twatwal, ka ocung acugga, tyenne ki komme bor katto dano woko 	it is a very large bird, with very long legs and very tall neck, it does not fly but runs very fast when it stands and with its body it is taller than man 
gikke me tic biccakke awene? 	when will the stoppage of work start?
ongaddo ngutte matek ka oweko oneno 	he stretched his neck very much to enable him to see
Ka marwa doŋ oteggi, wabibedo ki tekcwiny i nino me ŋolo kop, pien kit macalo Yecu obedo kwede, meno bene en aye kit macalo wan watye kwede i lobo man. 	This is how love is made complete among us so that we will have confidence on the day of judgment: In this world we are like Jesus.
tem wunu tinno cukari man ma gimiiniwu ni atinna wek otyek tam man me kwan 	try to use the sugar which you have been given sparingly in order for it to last up to the end of the term
aribe giwotto kacel i dul madit 	the weaver birds travel together in a large group
i yatte twerro rokke 	the wood can be hollowed 
wek abul	let me roast 
cir ticce pe iwekki	endure the work, don't give up 
oyetta ci adongge matek omiyo okok	he abused me therefore I boxed him very hard which made him cry
Wun lumiŋmiŋ! Ŋat ma tiyo gin ma woko pe en aye bene otiyo gin ma i iye? 	But now as for what is inside you—be generous to the poor, and everything will be clean for you.
geddo gin matek mada 	building is a very difficult thing
Gin me lewic ki lok miŋmiŋ, nyo kadi ki loko lok oree ma konnye pe, myero bene pe owinnye botwu. Ma ka timo jami magi, wumi pwoc bot Lubaŋa. 	and walk in the way of love, just as Christ loved us and gave himself up for us as a fragrant offering and sacrifice to God.
anyira gimwolle ki karatac me coron ka gitye ki kwer 	the girls dress themselves with toilet paper as sanitary pads when they have menses
“Myero wunen ni pe wucayo ŋat mo acel ki i kin jo magi matino-ni	“See that you do not despise one of these little ones
ladit dong ogaane i wii komme kun kwanno kwedde lok awinya 	the old man has sat on his inclined chair and reading a newspaper
Man aye bibedo kare botwu me tito lok me caden i koma. 	And so you will bear testimony to me.
cittu ka ommo dyangi ki i olet 	go to bring the cattle home from the pasture
olanynyo lawotte mada  	he insulted his friend very much  
Ka gibito ŋat mo, en pe myero owacci, “Lubaŋa aye ma bita”, pien Lubaŋa pe gibito ki tiyo gin marac, en bene pe bito ŋat mo. 	When tempted, no one should say, “God is tempting me.” For God cannot be tempted by evil, nor does he tempt anyone;
lawangge onigge ni dok yello dano twatwal 	a man with one of the eyes always half shuts does trouble people very much
dok en aye okwoŋo onyo moo i koma me yika. 	She poured perfume on my body beforehand to prepare for my burial.
otigo manok tyekko kwon yee 	a small amount of lady fingers' sauce, can finish a large amount of millet bread
pi meno alegi ni idi cwinyi wek iwiny lokka mot ma cwinyi opye. 	Therefore, I beg you to listen to me patiently.
tye joo mukene ma tii maber labongo twoo mo	there are some people who do age well without any serious illness 
joo Lunam cubbo hole mabecco mada 	the Lunam make very good papyrus mats 
nyaar yang con giputto aputta ci onynyo, en onynyone ni aye giwacci gin maber mada 	long time ago the pubic hairs used to be plucked and small pimples ensued, these pimples were regarded as signs of beauty
lokke twerro twekke	the news can be sent or transmitted from hand to hand
en nino ducu rii ka kwan 	he always stays for a long time studying
opany clue dit mada ma ka odonggi kwedde ci retti piny cut 	his palm is very big, and if he was to hit you with it, it would throw you to the ground
nyot layata ka imii ki latin 	mash the potatoes and then give them to the child
Pi meno, utmegina, wan doŋ watye ki yo me donyo i kabedo maleŋ ki tekcwiny pi remo pa Yecu. 	Therefore, brothers and sisters, since we have confidence to enter the Most Holy Place by the blood of Jesus,
pi ryekke omiyo olwii woko ki i jero 	for his own intelligence made him escape from the jail
Lwak gucako cito bot Pilato, gupenye wek otim kit ma yam tiyo-ni. 	The crowd came up and asked Pilate to do for them what he usually did.
Yecu openye ni, “Nyiŋi aŋa?” Ogamo ni, “Nyiŋa Legion, pien wapol.” 	Then Jesus asked him, “What is your name?” “My name is Legion,” he replied, “for we are many.”
Nyo ka olege ni omiye rec, ci bimiye twol? 	“Which of you, if your son asks for bread, will give him a stone?
Piŋo pe wuniaŋ lok ma awaco? Pien pe wutwero winyo lokka. 	I have not come on my own; God sent me.
tal rec magi maber 	smoke these fishes well
Ci oryemogi woko ki i nyim kom me ŋolo kop. 	So he drove them off.
Pien Jon yam obino botwu kun lubo yo me kit ma atir, ento wun wukwero ye en woko	“‘I will not,’ he answered, but later he changed his mind and went.
wek gin ducu ma tye i polo ki i lobo, kadi wa gin ducu ma tye piny i te lobo, gurum coŋgi piny me woro nyiŋ Yecu, 	Therefore God exalted him to the highest place and gave him the name that is above every name,
angeyo gin ma imitto 	I know what you want 
lutkot ogoyo dano 	people have been struck by lightning
Mumiyo nyiŋe oywek i lobo Ciria ducu, ci dano gukelo jo ducu ma komgi lit bote, jo ma gitwo kit two mapatpat ki jo ma arem obwoyogi, jo ma tye ki cen maraco, jo ma twoyo two alili, ki jo ma twoyo two akweya, ci en ocaŋogi. 	News about him spread all over Syria, and people brought to him all who were ill with various diseases, those suffering severe pain, the demon-possessed, those having seizures, and the paralyzed; and he healed them.
Askari gudwogo bot ajwagi madito pa Lubaŋa ki Luparicayo. Gin gupenyogi ni, “Piŋo pe wukele?” 	Some wanted to seize him, but no one laid a hand on him.
ruk koti macol en aye ber 	it is better to put on a black coat
dakone caar pe nngeyo gwoko ot maleng 	she is a careless or disorderly woman, she does not know how to look after the house
waŋi bicor woko, pe ibineno ceŋ kare mo” Lupu ocido waŋe oyotoyot, ci opaŋŋe pi yenyo dano wek omak bade opeye kwede. 	You are going to be blind for a time, not even able to see the light of the sun.” Immediately mist and darkness came over him, and he groped about, seeking someone to lead him by the hand.
yab wangwa 	open our eyes
gob dyel ki romi	alternate goats with the sheep
Wun mono pacowu pe, ka ma wutwero camo iye camo iye cam ki mato mat-gu? Nyo wucayo jo ducu muye Lubaŋa, kun wuketo lewic i kom jo ma pe tye ki gin mo? Myero awac botwu gin aŋo? Wumito apwowu? Pe atwero pwoyowu pi lok man. 	Don’t you have homes to eat and drink in? Or do you despise the church of God by humiliating those who have nothing? What shall I say to you? Shall I praise you? Certainly not in this matter!
ngadi twarro twatwal ka onino 	so and so snores too much when he is asleep
Pien wuŋeyo cik ma yam wamiyo botwu pi Rwot Yecu. 	For you know what instructions we gave you by the authority of the Lord Jesus.
Ka Kerode owinyo pire ci owacci, “Jon ma yam atoŋo wiye en aye ocer woko.” 	But when Herod heard this, he said, “John, whom I beheaded, has been raised from the dead!”
“Pe imaki, pe ibil, pe igudi”? 	Since you died with Christ to the elemental spiritual forces of this world, why, as though you still belonged to the world, do you submit to its rules:
dano ducu guwinynyo ni Otto labem dano 	everybody heard that Otto is a man who charms people
i kare macon litino cukul ononggo gibutto i wii gwele 	in the past the school children used to sleep on bed made of wood tied with a kind of rope 
cet ma latin opyello i bataniya geeno tek myerro gilwok alwokka 	the stool which the child has passed on the blanket cannot be wiped but must be washed 
ikare munyoo ni tjaa ma tammo pirri, ka pe igeene 	these days if you are not well known, who will think of you 
Pien aŋa madit, ŋat ma bedo i dog cam, kece mono ŋat ma kelle cam? Pe ŋat ma bedo i dog cam? Ento an abedo i kinwu macalo ŋat ma tiyo pi dano. 	For who is greater, the one who is at the table or the one who serves? Is it not the one who is at the table? But I am among you as one who serves.
pukko kado i dek	to put excessive salt in the sauce
oitto yec madowong mada i gee kinanga me Hugo ne 	he heaped up a lot of luggage on the back of the camel to carry
muyembene pie ci ento twerro kaane 	the mango is cold but it can be bitten 
latin man dok maarro Iweny twawal kadi i gin mo ma teere pe 	this child loves very much fighting even for useless things
Pien yam con i kare ca Teyuda otuc ci omine kene ni en e dano madit, ki jo mogo ma giromo ka miya aŋwen guribbe kwede	Some time ago Theudas appeared, claiming to be somebody, and about four hundred men rallied to him
dano ma dongobabbe woko pe ngeyo gin mo obeddo macalo latin 	a person who is completely confused and does not know anything, he is just like a child
pe wugatwii litino woko ki i kom kwan	do not mislead the children from their studies
lakucel pala loka	one-edged like a bantu knife
gucu twol ka gimakko ki yibbe 	flinging the snake when caught by its tail
danone pengeyo pur maber 	the man does not know how to cultvate well
Ento an awaco botwu ni, Pe icul kwor i kom dano mo ma otimo gin marac i komi. 	But I tell you, do not resist an evil person
miyo giŋolo kop loyogi pi turo cikkegi mukwoŋo. 	For when their sensual desires overcome their dedication to Christ, they want to marry.
Cwiny Maleŋ owaco bot Pilipo ni, “Nyik cok, irwatte ki gadigadi man.” 	The Spirit told Philip, “Go to that chariot and stay near it.”
Jo mogo i kingi, Kumenayo ki Alegijada, yam amiyogi i ciŋ Catan wek gupwonnye guwek yeto Lubaŋa.	holding on to faith and a good conscience, which some have rejected and so have suffered shipwreck with regard to the faith.
ka wawotto maber, onyo i cawa man noggo dong wao Kampala 	if we travel well, at about this time we shall have reached Kampala
pe tiyo ticce maber, joggo ajogga 	he does not do his work very well but does it roughly 
aboce oaa i kaka pa obato ki mwodo	aboce came from the family of yams such as obato and mwodo
pammo lobo i kom ot 	plastering the house with the clay house can be well plastered
watye ka lebbo gunia kado 	we are canying a gunny sack of salt
Wuti? yatta, ci wupwony kita, pien an awor, dok amwol bene i cwinya, mumiyo wun bene wubilimo yweyo i cwinywu. 	Take my yoke upon you and learn from me, for I am gentle and humble in heart, and you will find rest for your souls.
Pien abino me poko kin dano woko ki wonne, nyako bipokke woko ki minne, ki ci-wod bene bipokke woko ki dane. 	For I have come to turn “‘a man against his father, a daughter against her mother, a daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law—
Ojwinyojwiny abic pe gicato pi cente pyeraryo? Ento pe tye mo acel i kingi ma wi Lubaŋa twero wil iye. 	Are not five sparrows sold for two pennies? Yet not one of them is forgotten by God.
ngir lok ki meeni ento pe ki bot dano mukene, pien meeni pe tammo pirre 	insist obstinately to your mother but not to other people because your mother does not mind about it
nyo wutwero limo batija kit ma gibatija kwede an-ni?” 	“Can you drink the cup I drink or be baptized with the baptism I am baptized with?”
Iyelli Oketa yang ber  	the late Mr Oketa was a good man
latin gwok orweny woko, cit wunu ka yenynye 	the puppy has disappeared, go to look for it 
okoc lee geer mada 	an old lone animal is very ferocious
litino aye layo dyewor 	the children are the ones that pass urine at wet their beds 
twoo dobo opotto i komme 	he is infected with leprosy
Ka wawaco ni waribbe kwede kun pud wawoto ka macol, wan lugoba, timwa noŋo ada pe iye. 	If we claim to have fellowship with him and yet walk in the darkness, we lie and do not live out the truth.
latong pa latek aye omo	the axe of a strong man is fetched by a strong man
Kombeddi an doŋ abecito i Jerucalem, ma an lamabuc pa Cwiny Maleŋ, kun pe aŋeyo gin ma bipoto i koma kunnu. 	“And now, compelled by the Spirit, I am going to Jerusalem, not knowing what will happen to me there.
en dong otuk ocitto woko 	he has already flown away
jang yat 	the branch of a tree 
remmo kidi madit i yoo me gengo dano wok kenyo 	rolling a big stone on the road to prevent people passing along the path 
tong lyak yatte woko ka dong icoor ci pongo piny woko 	cut the roots ot the tree and then push and it will fall down
Lwak gucamo nio ka guyeŋ	The people ate and were satisfied
“ ‘Aŋeyo ticci ducu, mar ma itye kwede, niyeni ki ticci me konyo dano, ki kit ma idiyo kwede cwinyi. Aŋeyo ni ticci ma kombeddi itye ka tiyone kato me kare mukwoŋo ca. 	I know your deeds, your love and faith, your service and perseverance, and that you are now doing more than you did at first.
en aye wulub kore wa i ot ma en bidonyo iye, 	Follow him to the house that he enters,
“Gipwo Rwot Lubaŋa pa Icrael, pien doŋ olimo jone, okokogi. 	“Praise be to the Lord, the God of Israel, because he has come to his people and redeemed them.
Wuleg wek pe obin otimme i cwir. 	Pray that this will not take place in winter,
laworro pe tye ki laremme  	a miser has no friends
Ento ka pe wutimo ki dano kica, ci Wonwu ma tye i polo pe bitimowu kica i kom bal mewu.”] 	But if you do not forgive others their sins, your Father will not forgive your sins.
Cik lok magi dok ipwony ki dano. 	That is why we labor and strive, because we have put our hope in the living God, who is the Savior of all people, and especially of those who believe.
gweno pappe ka too 	a chicken flaps its wings when dying 
Ento wubed ki yomcwiny i lok man ni, wuribbe i can pa Kricito, wek dok wubed ki yomcwiny madit i kare ma deyone binen. 	Dear friends, do not be surprised at the fiery ordeal that has come on you to test you, as though something strange were happening to you.
jem wuno cammo cam me cukul ma pe ber 	strike against eating the school food which is not good 
odilo omotto 	the ball has entered the goal
litino man kitgi raccu mada nen man gupacco kor muyembe woko 	these children have very bad behaviour, look at how they have peeled off the stem of the mango tree
gitiyo ki luduku me cello gin mo keken  	a gun is used for shooting anything
pien cik pa Moses yam pe ocobo gin mo kakare, ento kombeddi doŋ gikelo gen mo maber makato, ma twero miyo wanyiko cok bot Lubaŋa. 	(for the law made nothing perfect), and a better hope is introduced, by which we draw near to God.
amuka poto tyene ki pa wonne	The young rhino bull compares the size of its spoor with that of its father
Ka Yecu oŋeyo, ci openyogi ni, “Piŋo wupennye kekenwu ni mugati pe, wun jo ma niyewu nok? 	Aware of their discussion, Jesus asked, “You of little faith, why are you talking among yourselves about having no bread?
gitye ka uurro mada tukku me rette 	they are amazed or astonished at the game of wrestling 
Otimo man wek emi lonyo me deyone oŋene i kom atabo me kica, ma en yam oyubo wa con wek obed ki deyo, 	What if God, although choosing to show his wrath and make his power known, bore with great patience the objects of his wrath—prepared for destruction?
mac tye ka mee mat 	the fire is increasing ferociously 
Gibitimo man i komwu pien pe giŋeyo Won, kadi an. 	“All this I have told you so that you will not fall away.
obutto ataro ni ngaca 	he lied carelessly free on his back
apwoyo mada ka konynya 	thank you very much for helping me
pe angeyo gin angoo ma omiyo tye ka judo 	I do not know why she is sulky 
Ento koni wumito neka, an dano ma atittiwu lok me ada ma awinyo ki bot Lubaŋa	I am telling you what I have seen in the Father’s presence, and you are doing what you have heard from your father.”
ocitto woko ni wong 	he went away for good
amitto tic me paipo ma gitye ka ketto me pii i oda myerro dong otum i Dino me baraja 	I want the work for the pipes that are being laid in my house for water, to be finished by Monday
Man doŋ lanyut me aryo ma Yecu otiyo ka oa ki i Judaya, obino i Galilaya.	When he inquired as to the time when his son got better, they said to him, “Yesterday, at one in the afternoon, the fever left him.”
pien cakke i nino mukwoŋo o kwede wa onyoo, wuribbe kweda i tic me tito lok me kwena maber. 	In all my prayers for all of you, I always pray with joy
En ogamo ni, “Pe wun aye myero wuŋe kare wa nino ma yam Lubaŋa Won omoko i te twero mere. 	He said to them: “It is not for you to know the times or dates the Father has set by his own authority.
gung piny ka imitti inen maber  	kneel down  well if u want to see
pit yat 	plant trees
Ento kombeddi myero doŋ wubwotgi woko ducu: kiniga, kwar cwiny, raccwiny, yet, ki loko lok mogo me lewic ma pe myero giwiny ka katti ki i dogwu. 	You used to walk in these ways, in the life you once lived.
Ker pa Lubaŋa pe ocuŋ i kom gin ma giloko aloka ento i kom tek. 	For the kingdom of God is not a matter of talk but of power.
kel lyedi me lyello wic 	bring the razor for shaving the hair 
lam maber wek wacinek lee mapol 	bless the hunt so that we may kill many animals 
dog latin jot ki dek ka cammo oyot oyot 	the child's mouth gets smeared with food when she eats quickly
kare mukene cwinynye puk ni elweny woko i kom joo mogo ma gilokko lok me anywar anywar i kin dano 	sometimes he feels urged to fight with those who talk arrogantly among the people
Jo-nu guwaco ni, “Rwot ocer ada, onyutte bot Cimon!” 	There they found the Eleven and those with them, assembled together
timmo ganya ganya 	doing it badly 
ob mac kany 	make fire here 
gigoyo jiga i kare madit me do  	the drum is played when matching at an important day
donynyo pa anyena i ot dong omotto 	the bride is now settled in her house
Yecu odokke iye ni, “In pe iŋeyo gin ma atye ka tiyo, ento ibiniaŋ lacen.” 	He came to Simon Peter, who said to him, “Lord, are you going to wash my feet?”
wanynyo cammo rec	yearning to eat fish
dong Patiko ki Payira en aye tong leb Acoli 	Patiko and Payira language is the real or standard Acholi
Gabuna me Bege me Uganda 	The Governor of the Bank of Uganda
Pien ka ma gicikke me leyo lim tye iye, myero koŋ gimok ni, ŋat muciko doŋ oto. 	In the case of a will, it is necessary to prove the death of the one who made it,
Latel myero obed laboŋo lok mo ma gijuke iye, obed ki dako acel, ogwokke kene, obed ryek, obed dano ma giworo. Obed dano ma gwoko welo, lapwony maber, 	Here is a trustworthy saying: Whoever aspires to be an overseer desires a noble task.
puk con, odiko con miyo imatto yamo magic mamit me odiko 	rising very early in the morning is very good, it makes you breathe in the fresh, cold, nice air of the morning
Waraga man oa ki bot Paulo, ma pi mit pa Lubaŋa yam Lubaŋa olwoŋe me bedo lakwena pa Kricito Yecu, ki dok ki bot ominwa Coctene. 	Paul, called to be an apostle of Christ Jesus by the will of God, and our brother Sosthenes,
olweddo winyo woko ki odoo acel ma oyuyo 	he struck down several birds 
gitye ka pwoddo gwiny lukwoo mada ki anino 	the thieves' buttocks are being beaten thoroughly with hippopotamus hide 
Lubaga en aye lacwec dano 	God is the creator of man 
Koŋ wuwiny lokka, wun ma wuwaco ni, “Tin nyo diki wabicito i gaŋ munyo, wabityeko kunnu mwaka acel kun wacato wil dok wanoŋo magoba,” 	Now listen, you who say, “Today or tomorrow we will go to this or that city, spend a year there, carry on business and make money.”
digo tyen woko ka gibeddo i wii tyen pi kare malac 	if one sits for a long time on a leg, it becomes numbed or the leg will develop numbness
ka imitto nonggo two me jonynyo oyot oyot ci but ki dako ma lacoco 	if you want to get slim disease AIDS) quickly, sleep with a prostitute
inonggo rukca ki kwene me katto woko ki i cukull dyer wor? 	where did you get the permission to get out of the school at night? 
jugge twatwal genggo dano cakko wot 	moving about too much doing nothing delays people starting the journey see
Kerode ki askarine bene guŋale, gunyware	Then Herod and his soldiers ridiculed and mocked him
en owacci enenno Aluma ka dyewor ci lokke woko dokko labarakak, gnu ma mwoddo dano 	he said that he saw Aluma at night when she changed into a leopard or lion that is a man-eater
gweno ne pud peya gibucco yecce  	the chicken's feathers have not yet been plucked
Yecu oa ki kunnu ocito odonyo i kacokke. 	For the Son of Man is Lord of the Sabbath.”
takko wic tegge 	moving the head aside so as to avoid being hurt 
nino nurru wangge 	he is feeling sleepy 
lumme twerro jwerre 	the grass can be slashed
Gin ma yam onyuto marre botwa en ene, Lubaŋa ocwalo Wode acel keken i lobo wek omi wabed kwo pire. 	This is how God showed his love among us: He sent his one and only Son into the world that we might live through him.
Pe wuŋeyo ni ka doŋ wumine kenwu bot ŋat mo calo opii me winyo gin ma en loko, doŋ bene wudoko opii pa ŋat ma wuwinyo lokke-ni? Nyo wudoko opii me bal ma terowu i to, nyo wudoko opii me winyo lok pa Lubaŋa, ma telowu i kit ma atir. 	What then? Shall we sin because we are not under the law but under grace? By no means!
oduro kare ducu nyak madowong mada dok mit bene mada ka pe kwkii ocubbo 	oduro always produces a lot and is very sweet unless the insects have laid their eggs inside them
Acikowu matek i nyiŋ Rwot ni, myero wukwan waraga man bot utmego ducu. 	I charge you before the Lord to have this letter read to all the brothers and sisters.
anyogi tye ka ngok 	the maize is bringing forth it's cob
Pe te lokke ni wan watye ki twero i kom niyewu, ento watiyo kwedwu kacel wek wubed ki yomcwiny, pien wucuŋo matek i kom niye.	I call God as my witness—and I stake my life on it—that it was in order to spare you that I did not return to Corinth.
danone nen nono pe tye ki gin mo wacel 	the man appears prosperous but he has nothing at all
ka ma kwidi ma camogi pe to, ki macce bene pe to.] 	‘the worms that eat them do not die, and the fire is not quenched.’
ngatti monni ogullo okego i tee baraja en 	somebody spat a thick phlegm on the verandah here
remo tye ka ton ki i umme 	the blood is dripping from his nose
Onoŋo amiyo bote kare me ŋut, ento en okwero ŋut i tim tarwaŋe-ni. 	I have given her time to repent of her immorality, but she is unwilling.
Doŋ ipo i kom gin ma ilimo ki ma iwinyo	Remember, therefore, what you have received and heard; hold it fast, and repent
pien ker pa Lubaŋa tye pi jo macalo gin. 	He said to them, “Let the little children come to me, and do not hinder them, for the kingdom of God belongs to such as these.
Nen, jo aryo gubedo ka lok kwede, jo-nu onoŋo aye Moses ki Elia, 	Two men, Moses and Elijah, appeared in glorious splendor, talking with Jesus.
Ka apoko jami ducu ma atye kwede, ma bene amiyo koma ni giwaŋ woko ki mac, ento ka pe atye ki mar, ci pe konya ki gin mo. 	If I give all I possess to the poor and give over my body to hardship that I may boast, but do not have love, I gain nothing.
Ento i kare ma en cikogi owacci, “Abidwogo botwu ka Lubaŋa biye,” ci ocako kwaŋ nia ki i Epeco. 	But as he left, he promised, “I will come back if it is God’s will.” Then he set sail from Ephesus.
oyo pii i poto gin anena 	pouring water in the flower garden 
bege en aye kama dano gikanno iye limgi mape gikwallo, ka lacen gicito gikwanynyo ma noknok ka gimitto 	a bank is a safe place where people save their money and later they go and get it in small amounts as they want
lok abwoc abwoc wan pe wamitto kany	we do not want here an arrogant and insolent talks 
Wun mon, wumine kenwu i te loc pa cogwu, pien meno aye gin ma myero i kin jo ma tye i Rwot. 	And whatever you do, whether in word or deed, do it all in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God the Father through him.
poc i lok macon ma kit meno pe dong twerre	to remember old matters like that is now impossible
Wubol woko cen gin ducu me lewic ki tim maraco ma doŋ onya botwu, wugam lok pa Lubaŋa ma opito i iwu ki mwolo, pien twero laro tipowu. 	Therefore, get rid of all moral filth and the evil that is so prevalent and humbly accept the word planted in you, which can save you.
Dok mon ma giyac gibineno cam i kare meno, ki mon ma gidoto litino bene! Pien can man madit bipoto i lobo, ki kiniga madwoŋ bipoto i kom jo me rok man. 	How dreadful it will be in those days for pregnant women and nursing mothers! There will be great distress in the land and wrath against this people.
Okwanyo Petero ki litino pa Jebedayo aryo me wot kwede, ci cwinye ocako poto matek ki kumo bene madwoŋ. 	He took Peter and the two sons of Zebedee along with him, and he began to be sorrowful and troubled.
Ci guloko deyo pa Lubaŋa ma pe to woko, kun giporo ki cal pa dano ma to, nyo ki cal pa winyo, nyo me pa lee, nyo me pa twol-gu. 	Although they claimed to be wise, they became fools
stabbing dano gubakke mada ki palaa i kare ma gitye ka myel 	people stabbed one another very much during the time when they were dancing
Ento bedo kwo i kom mitte twatwal piwu. 	I am torn between the two: I desire to depart and be with Christ, which is better by far;
en latet maber mada me palaa	he is a very good blacksmith at making knives
wek wun bene wudokka iye, ka an abititowu kit twero mumiyo atiyo lok man. 	Answer me, and I will tell you by what authority I am doing these things.
Kit macalo ceŋ otimme i kare pa Nua, bitimme kit meno bene i kare me dwogo pa Wod pa dano. 	As it was in the days of Noah, so it will be at the coming of the Son of Man.
tin ilekko ningo? 	what did you dream about today? 
lanyam pa Anek dong opong ki bur keken	the mouth of Anek is full of sores with sores
gurumme ka lweny i ot ken ken gi kuno 	they were enganged in fighting in the house by themselves
Man pe doŋ gin ma pire dit twatwal ka ce lutic pa Catan gilokke ginen calo lutic ma tiyo gin ma atir	And no wonder, for Satan himself masquerades as an angel of light.
oculi peddo gwinynye malac ci gweno nenno ci binno beddo ka tonggone ci makko wii gweno woko i gwinynye 	one of the small carnivores, member of the monngoose family, opens its anus very wkiely and a chicken comes and pecks it and its head is caught there in the carnivore's anus 
dok gubed ki twero me ryemo cen. 	and to have authority to drive out demons.
Yecu ogudo waŋgi kun wacci, “Myero otimme botwu kit macalo niyewu tye kwede.” 	As Jesus went on from there, two blind men followed him, calling out, “Have mercy on us, Son of David!”
wugonygi ci wukelgi bota. 	saying to them, “Go to the village ahead of you, and at once you will find a donkey tied there, with her colt by her
Waraga man oa ki bot Paulo ma en lakwena pa Kricito Yecu pi mit pa Lubaŋa. Bot jo pa Lubaŋa ma tye i Epeco, ma gin aye jo ma genne i Kricito Yecu: 	Get rid of all bitterness, rage and anger, brawling and slander, along with every form of malice.
Luparicayo mogo ma i kin lwak guwacce ni, “Lapwony, juk lupwonnyeni.” 	Some of the Pharisees in the crowd said to Jesus, “Teacher, rebuke your disciples!”
Ka Yecu oniaŋ penygi, ci odok iye botgi ni, “Piŋo wutye ka pennye i cwinywu? 	The Pharisees and the teachers of the law began thinking to themselves, “Who is this fellow who speaks blasphemy? Who can forgive sins but God alone?”
Ladit mo ma Laroma ma loyo askari miya yam tye ki laticce ma en maro twatwal, ma kome lit, cok to. 	There a centurion’s servant, whom his master valued highly, was sick and about to die.
komme ngwee tik 	she has a pungent smell 
orya dong wacam wunu pien tic ducu dong otum maber 	all right, let us eat now because all the work is finished now
Wapwoyo Lubaŋa pien oketo i i Tito miti madwoŋ ma rom ki mewa me konyowu. 	as it is written: “The one who gathered much did not have too much, and the one who gathered little did not have too little.”
akeyo litinona i cukul ma pat pat	I sent my children to various schools, in other words, I scattered my children into various schools
min lakerre myerro obed ka matto pii madowong ka wek cak ogeer madowong i tunnone 	the neonate's mother must take a lot of fluid so that much milk may form in her breast 
“Yam tye dano mo ma lalonyo ma ruko boŋo ma lamar lamar ki kanyi maber me boŋo camanini kun camo cam me wel madwoŋ nino ducu. 	“Anyone who divorces his wife and marries another woman commits adultery, and the man who marries a divorced woman commits adultery.
Lubaŋa pe ooro Wode i lobo ni oŋol kop i kom lobo, ento wek lobo olarre pi en. 	For God so loved the world that he gave his one and only Son, that whoever believes in him shall not perish but have eternal life.
jo mukene gucanne iye, wun wudonyo i cannegi.” 	I sent you to reap what you have not worked for
Ka Yecu onene kun obuto, dok oŋeyo ni en ori kunnu pi kare malac, openye ni, “Imito icaŋ?” 	One who was there had been an invalid for thirty-eight years.
omiyo bot dano acel acel dul lim kit macalo en romo tic kwede. Ci oa gire ocito i wotte. 	Then he went on his journey.
Kadi bed onoŋo imiyo pwoc maber, pe konyo dano mukene ca me doŋo kadi ki acel mo. 	You are giving thanks well enough, but no one else is edified.
jami ma iyubo-ni bibedo pa aŋa ce?’ 	Then who will get what you have prepared for yourself?’
nino ducu tirro i gang pa laremme 	always goes to his friends 
lawang rwot  	confidant of the chief
Ento onoŋo tamgi yam oumme woko	We are not like Moses, who would put a veil over his face to prevent the Israelites from seeing the end of what was passing away.
Nino ducu, dyewor ki dyeceŋ, en bedo i kin lyel ki i wi cere kun kok, dok ŋolo kome kene ki kidi. 	Night and day among the tombs and in the hills he would cry out and cut himself with stones.
okatto woko ni wic 	he went out at once unobserved
gwnynye meno gin pa litino pe pa ludito	pinching is the thing only for children not for adults
titte wek ongee 	tell him so that he may understand
rwenynyo caa ne woko 	losing his watch 
Wan pe wacal ki pol pa dano mukene, ma girubo lok pa Lubaŋa ki lok mukene, macalo lucatwil ma pe genne	And who is equal to such a task?
okom oyoko langwec	by stumbling on it, a stump has pushed forward the runner
mac owang ojayo get gang 	the fire burnt and came very near the home
Ka en lwoŋo jo ma lok pa Lubaŋa obino botgi ni gin lubaŋa (ci ginacoya pe twero turre), 	Jesus answered them, “Is it not written in your Law, ‘I have said you are “gods”’?
Agikki me jami ducu doŋ cok	For this is the reason the gospel was preached even to those who are now dead, so that they might be judged according to human standards in regard to the body, but live according to God in regard to the spirit.
aparro maa mada 	I long very much for my mother
Ento ka giketo can i kom dano mo pi bedo ŋat muye Kricito, lewic pe myero omake, ento omi deyo bot Lubaŋa pi lwoŋe ki nyiŋ meno. 	If you suffer, it should not be as a murderer or thief or any other kind of criminal, or even as a meddler.
Yecu oloko lok meno atyer ka maleŋ. Petero otero en cen, ocako juke matek. 	He spoke plainly about this, and Peter took him aside and began to rebuke him.
acekere gitye ka lwokko arokile meggi 	the police constables are washing their puttees 
Pien ka wutye ki gin magi ducu, ma wutye kwede bene mabup, ci bimiyo wubedo jo ma ŋeyo Rwotwa Yecu Kricito i yo ma konyo, dok ma wunyak nyig mabeco. 	For if you possess these qualities in increasing measure, they will keep you from being ineffective and unproductive in your knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Lapyem i tuko pe twero loyo tuko ka pe olubo cik me tuko meno kikome. 	No one serving as a soldier gets entangled in civilian affairs, but rather tries to please his commanding officer.
ma pe oballo 	without committing sin
Pilato dok odonyo i Praitorion, olwoŋo Yecu, openye ni, “In i Kabaka pa Lujudaya?” 	This took place to fulfill what Jesus had said about the kind of death he was going to die.
wek kombeddi oti ki lwak jo muye Yecu me miyo luloc ki wegi twero ducu ma tye i polo guŋe ryeko pa Lubaŋa ma kite patpat. 	and to make plain to everyone the administration of this mystery, which for ages past was kept hidden in God, who created all things.
in pe ingeyo pokko dano ki aryo aryo? 	don't you know how to divide people into twos? 
lunggo jang yat piny ka wek gipwon nyigge 	bending the branch of the tree down so that its fruits can be picked or plucked
tenno canduk ki kidi ma oketto i teere 	supporting the box with a stone which is placed underneath
labolo ber mada me acamma odiko 	banana is very ngood for eating every morning
gkiwarro lee bene ki atero 	they hunt also with arrows
meno dong dano ma ogil woko ki daa pe dong parro 	the man is used to such quarrel,
Ka lukwena apar wiye aryo gulwoŋo lwak lupwonnye kacel ci guwaco botgi ni, “Pe myero wabwot tito lok pa Lubaŋa pi tic i kom meja. 	So the Twelve gathered all the disciples together and said, “It would not be right for us to neglect the ministry of the word of God in order to wait on tables.
ladep pye ni det det ka wotto 	the flea moves by jumping about from one place to another 
En pwoyo latic-cu pien olubo lok ma gicike kwede? 	Will he thank the servant because he did what he was told to do?
agulu ma itweyo i gee leela dong tye abuny mada	the pot which you have tied on the bicycle carrier is on the brink of falling off
Dano ma jolo latin mo acel macalo man i nyiŋa, noŋo ojolo an. 	And whoever welcomes one such child in my name welcomes me.
I kare ma atye ka wot i dye Kampala ci acom ki Okeny ma orii ononggo dong pi mwaka ma rommo abicel kulo mape anenne	while walking in Kampala I suddenly met Okeny whom I have not seen for the past six years 
pamba en aye yat ma donggo ma ceggo cego ma nyak nyingge ma gin matar ma yom ma obeddo callo yer ma walwonggo ni yecce en aye gicweyo doko bongo 	cotton is a plant which grows to a short height and produces seeds that are surrounded by white soft wool and it is this wool which is spun into threads to make fabrics for clothes
maleriya myello kom litino mada ka gitye kwedde 	malaria makes the choldren's bodies shake very much when they have them
Owaco bot dano mukene ni, “Luba.” Ento danonu ogamo ni, “Ladit, koŋ iwek aciyik wora.” 	He said to another man, “Follow me.” But he replied, “Lord, first let me go and bury my father.”
opurro poto ni met i net gangge 	he cultivated a very extensive field around his home
Lwak dano ducu onoŋo gitye woko ka lega i cawa me waŋo odok eceta 	And when the time for the burning of incense came, all the assembled worshipers were praying outside.
Man aye lapwonnye ma obedo caden i kom lok magi, dok ocoyogi	But Jesus did not say that he would not die; he only said, “If I want him to remain alive until I return, what is that to you?”
ka geddo maber ene  	here is a good place for building
pyee kitte macalo ogwal pyee kwede 	jump as the frog does, that is hop, leap and hop 
I kare ma doŋ onoŋo tiko mo acel me wel, ocito ocato jami ducu ma onoŋo en tye kwede, ci owilo tiko meno woko. 	When he found one of great value, he went away and sold everything he had and bought it.
ruu piny ki ruu piny 	day by day 
nyeerro dano pe ber 	to laugh at people is not good
Lagwok-doggola yabbe kika, romi winyo dwane	The one who enters by the gate is the shepherd of the sheep.
Yecu dok owaco ni, “Gin ma a ki i dano aye balo dano. 	He went on: “What comes out of a person is what defiles them.
kot tye ka jaar 	the clouds are accumulating and threatening to rain
wun kikomwu pe wudonyo iye, dok bene wugeŋo jo ma mito donyo iye woko. 	“Woe to you, teachers of the law and Pharisees, you hypocrites! You shut the door of the kingdom of heaven in people’s faces
ka imitto beddo lacan ci guk tic agukka 	if you want to be a poor man then be unsteady in any work 
jer cam ma icammoni wek oyab ii woko ma oponggi 	belch the food that you ate so that it may relieve the distension in your abdomen
Nino-nu onoŋo nino me Yubbe, cabit bene onoŋo doŋ cok cakke. 	It was Preparation Day, and the Sabbath was about to begin.
laworo olwiro ojwatto dako monni matek mada ma origgo ki koko 	yesterday a certain woman was striken badly, by the snake that strikes people and does not bite, and she ran crying
en lye ki twoo cim 	he has a disease of epilepsy 
pwony litino man ki kit maber 	teach the children good manners 
En yam owoto i cwiny ocito otito lok bot tipo pa jo ma tye i mabuc, 	He was put to death in the body but made alive in the Spirit.
obeddo piny ma kok kun cwikko kwedde umme 	she sat down crying and at the same time breathing in heavily
jami ma kit meno en aye mitte i ot man 	things like those are the ones that are wanted in this house
ocito bot Yecu, openye ni, “Ladit, pe iparo ni lamera oweka atye ka tic kena? Wac bote wek okonya.” 	She came to him and asked, “Lord, don’t you care that my sister has left me to do the work by myself? Tell her to help me!”
aweno komgi obeddo akinyo akinyo	the guinea fowl has variegated feather colours
Lubaŋa pi mitte kene onoŋo doŋ oyubo con ni wan myero wadok litinone pi tic pa Yecu Kricito. 	Praise be to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us in the heavenly realms with every spiritual blessing in Christ.
nang cwaa man wek owaa doggi 	suck this tamarind so that it may produce good taste in your mouth or good appetite
kwkii ma lak alakka ma wotto ki tyenne abicel ma tye ki yibbe ma ongom oille odok malo igeye en aye en cwinynyo kwedde ki dano ma lit twaltwal ma remme bene terro kare malac 	an insect with six legs with a long tail which is curved upward on its body with which it stings the people and it's sting is very painful and lasts for a long time
Yecu owacce ni, “Pi lok ma iloko-ni, ber doŋ idok paco, cen doŋ otyeko a woko ki i kom nyari.” 	Then he told her, “For such a reply, you may go; the demon has left your daughter.”
nyig yatte makko dong  	the fruit is bad and has a bad sticky taste
Pi lok me kwena maber-ri, yam giketa abedo latit-lok, lakwena ki lapwony bene. 	but it has now been revealed through the appearing of our Savior, Christ Jesus, who has destroyed death and has brought life and immortality to light through the gospel.
ryammo dano ki i wang tic 	dismissing a person from the work
amitto cukari me ratili abic 	I want five pounds of sugar
Pe gin ma donyo i dog dano aye balo dano, ento kono gin ma a ki i dog aye balo dano.” 	Jesus called the crowd to him and said, “Listen and understand.
Kit meno, kit macalo bal yam oloyo loc i to, kica bene myero olo loc pi kwano dano ni kitgi atir, wek omi gunoŋ kwo ma pe tum, pi Yecu Kricito Rwotwa.	But where sin increased, grace increased all the more,
Koŋ wutam pi lega me tim, kit ma gidoŋo kwede	“Consider how the wild flowers grow
Kayapa en aye ceŋ omiyo tam bot Lujudaya ni ber dano acel oto pi lwak. 	and brought him first to Annas, who was the father-in-law of Caiaphas, the high priest that year.
an pe angeyoni jalle matte twatwal 	I did not know that the fellow drinks very much
gonno wii leela 	turning the bicycle to another direction
Polo ki lobo gibitum, ento lokka pe bitum. 	Heaven and earth will pass away, but my words will never pass away.
Iwiyo ki i ot, ki i kin dano, ki i gang ducu en ngeyo maber 	he knows very well escaping from the house, from among the people, and from the homes
Mumiyo lok ma yam lanebi Jeremia oloko ocobbe kakare ni, “Yam gutero ciliŋ pyeradek, i wel ma jo mogo i kin likwayo pa Icrael oŋolo kwede welle, 	That is why it has been called the Field of Blood to this day.
cit ijak jang yat wek ikel iywee kwedde ki piny kany 	go and pull off a branch of a tree and come and with it sweep this place
Ka owinyo ni kome lit, ci omedde ki ri doki nino aryo i kabedo ma yam en tye iye. 	Now Jesus loved Martha and her sister and Lazarus.
Ka Juda, ŋat ma yam odobe-ni, oneno ni doŋ giŋolo kop oloyo Yecu, oŋut ci odwoko lim ryal pyeradek ca bot ajwagi madito pa Lubaŋa ki ludoŋo, 	So they bound him, led him away and handed him over to Pilate the governor.
lalur kona obilo ringo abula	when a hyena has tasted roast meat!
awobbe gitye ka coc me peny meegi 	the boys are answering their examination questions 
pok kin Joe ma gitye ka lweny 	separate the people who are fighting
pyerre opette  	she has a wide waist
Ceŋ tye dano mo i kin Luparicayo ma nyiŋe Nikodemo, ma en ŋat acel i kin jo madito me Judaya. 	If every one of them were written down, I suppose that even the whole world would not have room for the books that would be written.
ongwec me piyo dek nyo Burro ngor 	a stick whose one end is enlarged, rounded and shaped like a bean used for smashing or mashing cooked cowpeas and for mixing simsim paste with water
atuya maarro beddo i lum ma i dong kulu 	the small edible rats live in soft grass along the river bank 
ento ma pud peya onywalo litinone, dok bene ma peya gutiyo gin mo maber nyo marac, wek omi yub pa Lubaŋa me yer omedde, pe pi tic ento pi lwoŋone, 	Not only that, but Rebekah’s children were conceived at the same time by our father Isaac.
Lacen lamalaika acel i kom lumalaika abiro ma onoŋo gitye ki atabo abiro-ni obino bota owacca ni, “Bin wek anyutti kop ma doŋ giŋolo i kom dako ma lakwele marac, ma bedo i wi pii mapol-li. 	One of the seven angels who had the seven bowls came and said to me, “Come, I will show you the punishment of the great prostitute, who sits by many waters.
Cutcut otugi penye ni, ‘Larema, idonyo kany niŋniŋ ma kun pe iruko boŋo me nyom?’ Laco-nu oliŋ aliŋa litik. 	“But when the king came in to see the guests, he noticed a man there who was not wearing wedding clothes.
tye dano mogo ma gingoro gee awal miyo nen maber mada 	there are some people who decorate the back of the calabash plates to make them beautiful 
Dok i kare ma gineko lacadenni Citefano an onoŋo acuŋ kunnu apwoyo gin ma otimme, agwoko bene boŋo pa jo ma guneke.’ 	And when the blood of your martyr[a] Stephen was shed, I stood there giving my approval and guarding the clothes of those who were killing him.’
Gibineno waŋe, ki nyiŋe bene bibedo i tur nyimgi. 	They will see his face, and his name will be on their foreheads.
ngwece coo calo ngwec rec, remo nyo nyac 	smells like fish, blood or yaws sore
okono mukene obedo alwaya 	some pumpkins are oval
Guwacce ni, ‘Ladit, en doŋ tye ki ciliŋ alip acel!’ 	“‘Sir,’ they said, ‘he already has ten!’
ento ka aloko maber, ci idoŋa piŋo?” 	“If I said something wrong,” Jesus replied, “testify as to what is wrong
pammo lobo i kom ot	plastering the house with the clay house can be well plastered
per lok ki lacoone  	talk a lot to the man
Mumiyo Kerode ocikke kun kwoŋŋe akwoŋa bot nyakonu ni ebimiye gin ducu ma en bipenyo pire. 	On Herod’s birthday the daughter of Herodias danced for the guests and pleased Herod so much
roc ot meeri wek odok maber 	renovate your house to make it very good 
Ka gubino piny bot lupwonnye mukene, ci guneno lwak mapol gurumogi dyere, kun lupwony-cik gitye ka pyem kwedgi. 	When they came to the other disciples, they saw a large crowd around them and the teachers of the law arguing with them.
Cen maraco bene oa ki i kom jo mapol, kun gidaŋŋe ni, “In i Wod pa Lubaŋa!” Ento Yecu ojukogi, pe oye cen mo oloko, pien giŋeye, ni en Kricito ma Lubaŋa oyero. 	Moreover, demons came out of many people, shouting, “You are the Son of God!” But he rebuked them and would not allow them to speak, because they knew he was the Messiah.
En bene dok opimo cel, ci oromo futi miya aryo ki apar wiye abicel ka gipimo ki bad dano, kit macalo lamalaika opimo kwede. 	The angel measured the wall using human measurement, and it was 144 cubits thick.
mucumar gitiyo kwedde me tic mapol me guuro jami 	nail is used for many kinds of works for fixing things
Pien wan pe watwero tiyo gin mo ma pe rwatte ki lok ada, ento watwero tiyo gin ma rwatte ki gin ma tye ada keken. 	Now we pray to God that you will not do anything wrong—not so that people will see that we have stood the test but so that you will do what is right even though we may seem to have failed.
Ento ŋat acel i kingi, en Kayapa, ma en ajwaka madit i mwaka meno, owaco ki gin ni, “Wun pe wuŋeyo gin mo kadi matidi mo, 	If we let him go on like this, everyone will believe in him, and then the Romans will come and take away both our temple and our nation.”
dud mon Banyankole dok donge twatwal 	the Banyankole women's buttocks are very big
gin dong gujany wii kom kabeddo kama pe myerro gujany iye 	they sat on the chairs with an air in a place where they should not sit 
Lupwonnyene wigi onoŋo owil woko ka tero mugati, onoŋo gitye kimugati acel keken i yeya. 	The disciples had forgotten to bring bread, except for one loaf they had with them in the boat.
Dwan mo dok oa ki i wi komker ma wacci, “Wupak Lubaŋa, wun luticce ducu, wun jo ma wulwore, jo matino wa ki jo madito.” 	Then a voice came from the throne, saying: “Praise our God, all you his servants, you who fear him, both great and small!”
ummo wii cak kingoo? 	what does he cover the milk with? 
Pien Kricito pe odonyo i kabedo maleŋ ma dano otiyo ki ciŋ, ma obedo lapor ki kabedo maleŋ me adane, ento odonyo i polo kikome, ma i kare man en tye ka nen kunnu i nyim Lubaŋa piwa. 	For Christ did not enter a sanctuary made with human hands that was only a copy of the true one; he entered heaven itself, now to appear for us in God’s presence.
wang tula obeddo nigolo golo 	owls eyes are big and very large
ngaa mape ngeyo puggo dong candukke maber? 	who does not know how to lock his box well? 
tungu potto ni pip 	the borassus palm fruit falls heavily to the ground
Doŋ ka ce wun jo maraco wuŋeyo miyo mot mabeco bot litinowu, ci Wonwu ma tye i polo pe bimiyo jami mabeco makato ducu bot jo ma lege! 	Or if he asks for a fish, will give him a snake?
latinne pud peya ngeyo conynyo kwon 	the child does not yet know how to dent the kwon 
Ki kunnu ladit mony onoŋo mel mua ki i Alegijanderia ma cito Itali, ci omiyo wadonyo iye. 	There the centurion found an Alexandrian ship sailing for Italy and put us on board.
Wuŋeyo bene gin ma tye ka geŋe i kare-ni, wek onen ka doŋ kare oromo. 	And now you know what is holding him back, so that he may be revealed at the proper time.
Ento Yecu openyogi ni, “Giwaco niŋniŋ ni Kricito ma Lubaŋa oyero en lakwar Daudi? 	Then Jesus said to them, “Why is it said that the Messiah is the son of David?
Pi meno awaco botwu ni, gibikwanyo ker pa Lubaŋa woko ki botwu, ci gimiyo bot rok ma binyako nyig ma mitte iye kikome.” 	“He will bring those wretches to a wretched end,” they replied, “and he will rent the vineyard to other tenants, who will give him his share of the crop at harvest time.”
kabeddo man twerro tyerre ki dano me mot pi tic meeggi maber i taun kama ginammo iye 	this place can be offered to the people as a gift for their good work in the township as a recreation ground for them
a a wekku Iweny obeddi	no, stop fighting
ka wubilego gin mo i nyiŋa, abitiyo. 	Philip said, “Lord, show us the Father and that will be enough for us.”
I kare meno Yecu oa ki i Najaret me Galilaya obino bot Jon, ci Jon obatija en i kulu Jordan. 	At that time Jesus came from Nazareth in Galilee and was baptized by John in the Jordan.
Ka ce Lubaŋa ruko lum ma i tim kit meno, ma bedo tye pi nino ma tin keken, ento diki inoŋo gibolo woko i keno, ci en pe birukowu makato, wun jo ma niyewu nok? 	If that is how God clothes the grass of the field, which is here today, and tomorrow is thrown into the fire, how much more will he clothe you—you of little faith!
yikko layata i buro malyet wek ocek iye 	burying a potato in a hot ash for roasting it
yommo luwotte i ngwec	to surpass his friends in running 
man gigi meegi 	these are theirs
danone pe nen atata ikin dano 	the man does not come frequently among the people
Ka ceŋ atye kwedgi kacel, agwokogi i nyiŋi ma imiya	I am not praying for the world, but for those you have given me, for they are yours.
tye ka garro libira ne i ot 	looking for his needle in the house 
poorro kit yoo ma ngati mo timmo kwede	to copy the way how one does it
latinne pe ngeyo nanggo nyuka ki cinge maber 	the child child does not know how to scoop with his fingers and lick the porridge
en tye ki twer me makkowu 	he has the power to arrest you 
Ci kabaka biwaco bot jo ma tye yo tuŋ ma lacuc ni, ‘Wubin, wun jo ma Wora omiyowu gum, wule ker ma yam giyubo piwu cakke wa i acakki keto lobo. 	“Then the King will say to those on his right, ‘Come, you who are blessed by my Father; take your inheritance, the kingdom prepared for you since the creation of the world.
Mukwoŋo en oloko ni, “In pe imito gitum, kadi mot ma gityero, nyo gitum awaŋa ki gitum pi bal, cwinyi bene pe yom iye,” ma gin jami ma gityero pi cik. 	First he said, “Sacrifices and offerings, burnt offerings and sin offerings you did not desire, nor were you pleased with them”—though they were offered in accordance with the law.
Yecu owacce ni, “Doŋ inene, en aye ŋat ma tye ka lok kwedi-ni.” 	Jesus heard that they had thrown him out, and when he found him, he said, “Do you believe in the Son of Man?”
Odoŋ kare manok, lobo pe dok binena, ento wun wubinena	And I will ask the Father, and he will give you another advocate to help you and be with you forever—
yaa lwakgi 	their age mates or contemporary 
Pi ceŋ me Yubbe pa Lujudaya, dok pien lyel meno obedo cok, omiyo giyiko Yecu kunnu.	At the place where Jesus was crucified, there was a garden, and in the garden a new tomb, in which no one had ever been laid.
Ŋat mo openye ni, “Jo manok aye bilarre?” Yecu owaco botgi ni, 	Someone asked him, “Lord, are only a few people going to be saved?” He said to them,
Ento i kare ma dano doŋ gubuto woko, lakworre obino ci ocoyo doo i kin kal, ka ocito gire woko. 	But while everyone was sleeping, his enemy came and sowed weeds among the wheat, and went away.
Ka wukwano ci wutwero neno maber kit ma aniaŋ kwede i muŋ ma otiko Kricito. 	that is, the mystery made known to me by revelation, as I have already written briefly.
bongone obeddo ni gwereke	the cloth is very short
en meno gin mumiyo waŋeyo ni, man doŋ kare me agikki. 	This is how we know it is the last hour.
gee daba ma itee waarri i kom gin lagee tyen matye i doggola ka dong kiony i ot 	wipe the mud off on the sole of your shoes on the door mat and then enter the house
Pien yam wuto woko, ento kombeddi doŋ gikano kwowu kacel ki Kricito bot Lubaŋa. 	Set your minds on things above, not on earthly things.
otingo agulu pii i wiye woko ni cac 	she lifted the pot straight way to her head 
Ento i kin lukwena aneno Yakobo omin Rwot keken. 	Then after three years, I went up to Jerusalem to get acquainted with Cephas and stayed with him fifteen days.
litino guo woko ni pep mape ononggo purl wayubbe me jollogi 	the children arrived suddenly before we were ready to welcome them
litino gicello winyo mada ki latig dio 	the children shoot many birds with the catapult 
tyen mupira leela man twerro joye ka wek wuket iye manyen 	this bicycle tube can be deflated so that you may put in a new one
gijwatto gwiny dano tin mada ki akaa, joo ma laworo gukello jemmo kany	the people who brought a strike here yesterday, were caned with Bengal cane very much today
wit latigdio ci ibaa wek ocel winyo  	swing your stone and fling it at the bird to stone it
Okwoŋo akwoŋa kun wacce ni, “Gin ducu ma ibilegga abimiyi, kadi bed nucu kerra.” 	And he promised her with an oath, “Whatever you ask I will give you, up to half my kingdom.”
wang dwee tin nen maleng mada 	the moon is clearly seen today
ngallo kwon en aye pe hyena wacel 	eating kwon without the sauce cannot happen
Alwoŋo Lubaŋa me bedo cadenna kun awacciwu ki cwinya ducu ni, gin mumiyo pe abino i Korint, pien onoŋo amito timowu kica. 	set his seal of ownership on us, and put his Spirit in our hearts as a deposit, guaranteeing what is to come.
okwerro woko otalaa ni en pe emitto lok me cuna pa lacoone 	she frankly refused that she does not like the courtship of that man
pi kica madwoŋ pa Lubaŋawa ma oweko piny oru piwa ki malo, 	because of the tender mercy of our God, by which the rising sun will come to us from heaven
yikke i tee lum 	hiding under the grass
Lamalaika me adekke okuto tumme, ci lakalatwe madit oa ki i polo opoto piny, ma lyel calo mac dog raa, opoto i kom dul acel me adek me kulu ducu, ki i waŋ it ducu ma piine gunnye agunya. 	The third angel sounded his trumpet, and a great star, blazing like a torch, fell from the sky on a third of the rivers and on the springs of water—
rec lacaga (agara) tye ki lwak cogo acil madowong mada i komme	the lacaga fish has very many fine bones in its body
Ada, jo mogo tito pi Kricito ki cwiny me nyeko ki daa, ento jo mukene gitito ki cwiny maber. 	And because of my chains, most of the brothers and sisters have become confident in the Lord and dare all the more to proclaim the gospel without fear.
Okot olimmo mkiila me jabu me ngwec me mairo acel 	Okot got a gold medal in winning the one mile race 
Jo ma guneno gutito botgi lok ducu ma otimme i kom dano ma yam tye ki cen maraco, ki gin ma otimme i kom opego-gu. 	Those who had seen it told the people what had happened to the demon-possessed man—and told about the pigs as well.
Gibiloko ŋegi wek pe giwiny lok ada, kun giŋak woko giwirre i lok ma tere pe. 	Preach the word; be prepared in season and out of season; correct, rebuke and encourage—with great patience and careful instruction.
tye ka lac 	he is passing urine 
gigoye ma pe oballo gin me 	he was beaten though he dki not do anything wrong
cinamon ki gin mogo mukene ma ŋwecgi kur, odok eceta me awaŋa, murra, odok luban, koŋo vino, moo jeituni, moko mapwot ki ŋano, dyaŋi ki romi, aguragura, ki gadigadi lweny, opii, kadi wa kwo pa dano kikome. 	cargoes of cinnamon and spice, of incense, myrrh and frankincense, of wine and olive oil, of fine flour and wheat; cattle and sheep; horses and carriages; and human beings sold as slaves.
ot man dong oballe mada, lalakko dong biyubbone 	this house is now dilapidated, the heir will renovate it
Wun co bene, wumar monwu, pe wubed ki gero i komgi.	Wives, submit yourselves to your husbands, as is fitting in the Lord.
Rwot bicule pi timme-nu. 	Alexander the metalworker did me a great deal of harm
tika acitto an ki komma 	I should go myself
Jo mapol gupeto boŋŋigi i dye yo, ki jo mogo gupeto jaŋ yadi ma potgi oluk ma gu jako ki i potti. 	Many people spread their cloaks on the road, while others spread branches they had cut in the fields.
tukko ngwec nuddo kom dano ma komgi wac 	athletics wears out those who are lazy 
Lok tye kit man ni, dano ma coyo kodi manok, bikayo bene manok, ŋat ma coyo kodi madwoŋ, bikayo bene mabup. 	Then it will be ready as a generous gift, not as one grudgingly given.
pii madong odwon wokoni tika twerro tide? 	can the water which is almost dry, be drawn little by little?
wii meja man twerro line maber mada	the top of this table can be highly polished
latinni dok lacerre twatwal pe mitto winynyo lok mo me pwony 	your child is very stubborn, he does not want to listen to any talk or advice
camme mit mada	his food was very nice 
Ka obino botwa okwanyo del pyer Paulo otweyo ki tyene ki ciŋe kene, ci owaco ni, “Cwiny Maleŋ owaco kit man ni, Lujudaya ma i Jerucalem gibitweyo won del pyer man kit man, ci gibimiye i ciŋ Lurok.” 	Coming over to us, he took Paul’s belt, tied his own hands and feet with it and said, “The Holy Spirit says, ‘In this way the Jewish leaders in Jerusalem will bind the owner of this belt and will hand him over to the Gentiles.’”
lakwaara ocitto ka kwan 	my grandchild has gone to study 
Ŋat ma ite tye myero owiny lok ma Cwiny Maleŋ oloko bot lwak ducu ma guye an.’ 	Whoever has ears, let them hear what the Spirit says to the churches.
Ka ce gobana-ni miyo ada pa Lubaŋa medde ameda kun bene kelo deyo bote, ci piŋo pud dok giŋolo kop i koma calo an labalo?	Certainly not! If that were so, how could God judge the world?
Oyotoyot dano meno ocaŋ	Then Jesus said to him, “Get up! Pick up your mat and walk.”
pukko kado i dek  	putting excessive salt in the sauce 
olimmo pac me ryammo dakone 	he got permission to divorce his wife
Ento kombeddi i Kricito Yecu wun jo ma yam wutye ka mabor doŋ gikelowu cok pi to pa Kricito. 	Therefore, remember that formerly you who are Gentiles by birth and called “uncircumcised” by those who call themselves “the circumcision” (which is done in the body by human hands)—
gin angoo ma omwoc kuno ni pap?	what bursts there with a bang?
ngii ki tiyo tic kama rac 	get the experience of working in a dangerous place, be friendly
Atye ki gen me bino boti pi oyot, ento acoyo lok me pwony man boti wek, 	Those who have served well gain an excellent standing and great assurance in their faith in Christ Jesus.
Wuwiny ba, wun lulonyo, wukoki, dok wudaŋŋe, pi can ma bipoto i komwu. 	Now listen, you rich people, weep and wail because of the misery that is coming on you.
gimiyo boŋo camanini maberre ma ryeny dok maleŋ en aye ni en oruki.” Pien boŋo camanini maberre-nu obedo gin ducu ma tye atir ma jo maleŋ gitimo. 	Fine linen, bright and clean, was given her to wear.”
itte oteg 	his ears are standing out of the head
Yecu owaco ni, “Atyeko tittiwu ni an a en	Again he asked them, “Who is it you want?” “Jesus of Nazareth,” they said.
Nen, abimiyo lwak me dul pa Catan, jo ma yam gubedo ka cayi ma giwaco ni gin Lujudaya, kun i adane gin pe Lujudaya, ento giloko lok goba, nen, abimiyo gibino giryebbe piny i te tyeni, wek guniaŋ ada ni an amari. 	I will make those who are of the synagogue of Satan, who claim to be Jews though they are not, but are liars—I will make them come and fall down at your feet and acknowledge that I have loved you.
kel palaa ma lakke bit 	bring a knife with a sharp edge 
Utmego gucwalo Paulo woko oyot i yo ma cito i dog nam, ento Cira ki Temceo gudoŋ. 	The believers immediately sent Paul to the coast, but Silas and Timothy stayed at Berea.
wang pa duka acel tin obeddo rac mada, 	the burning of one of the shops was very bad 
Doŋ aŋa i kinwu ma twero medo mwaka acel i kom kwone pi bedo ki tam mapol? 	Are you not much more valuable than they?
ganno kwon pong cing 	taking a large amount of kwon in the hand 
min kidi 	big base stone for grinding 
wiye tye ka barre	he is having headache
kwotto dano	to backbite the people
litino gitye ka jakko jang muyembe woko	the children are pulling off the branches of the mango
Ento Yecu oŋeyo tamgi woko, ci openyogi ni, “Piŋo wutamo tam marac i cwinywu? 	At this, some of the teachers of the law said to themselves, “This fellow is blaspheming!”
tyen mupira leela man twerro joye ka wek wuket iye manyen 	this bicycle tube can be deflated so that you may put in a new one
Dok wuŋeyo kit ma wabako kwede dogwa botwu, kun waparo pi dano acel acel ma i kinwu, dok wacuko cwinywu macalo won litino cuko cwiny litinone. Dok wacikowu bene ni, 	For you know that we dealt with each of you as a father deals with his own children,
yenynyo lamerokoni maber wek wumak woko 	search the enemy thoroughly so that you may catch him
gin aganna mada	this is a wonderful thing
litino me nino man dong pe gingeyo myello myel Acoli 	the present children do not know how to dance the Acholi dances 
ento ŋat ma oora en me ada, atito ki lobo gin ma doŋ awinyo ki bote.” 	“I have much to say in judgment of you
dyangi gitye ka cam i punu 	the cattle are grazing in the pasture
ringo man rem woko pe rommo dano 	the meat will not be enough for the people or will be inadengate for the people
Wuruk jami lweny ducu ma Lubaŋa miyo, wek wucuŋ kun wugeŋŋe kekenwu i roro pa Catan. 	Finally, be strong in the Lord and in his mighty power.
Ento nia i acakki keto lobo ‘Lubaŋa oketo laco ki dako.’ 	“But at the beginning of creation God ‘made them male and female.’
Dok openyogi ni, “Wuyenyo aŋa?” Gudokke iye ni, “Yecu me Najaret.” 	When Jesus said, “I am he,” they drew back and fell to the ground.
aduno ka oling ngoone ci too cut	when the heart stops to beat death follows soon after
Wan waŋeyo ni Lubaŋa ŋolo kop atir dok kakare ka oŋolo kop oloyo jo ma gitimo gin macalo meno. 	so that, just as sin reigned in death, so also grace might reign through righteousness to bring eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord.
gucitto ka giine me twoo anino 	they went to be examined for sleeping sickness disease
tye gin acel keken: wiya bedo ka wil i gin mukato aŋec, kun alaro gin ma tye anyim calo dano ma tye i ŋwec me pyem. 	Brothers and sisters, I do not consider myself yet to have taken hold of it
Lacen lapwonnye meno mukene ma okwoŋo o i lyel bene odonyo iye	Both were running, but the other disciple outran Peter and reached the tomb first.
dwe man tin tar nyo leg mada 	the moon is very bright today
Pien ka alego Lubaŋa ma kun noŋo adumo aduma, cwinya bene lego, ento noŋo tamma pe timo iye gin mo. 	For if I pray in a tongue, my spirit prays, but my mind is unfruitful.
en pe ngeyo teddo dek mamit 	he does not know how to cook nice food
ribbo yoo kwedde	coming together with him
pwon lemun ikel me amatta 	pluck the lemon and bring it for drinking
Yecu odok iye ni, “Yam tye dano mo ma oa ki i Jerucalem, cito piny tuŋ Jeriko, ci orwatte ki luyak	In reply Jesus said: “A man was going down from Jerusalem to Jericho, when he was attacked by robbers
poc i lok macon ma kit meno pe dong twerre 	remembering old matters like that is now impossible
En muŋ mukanne pi kare malac bot lwak mapol ata, ento kombeddi do? Lubaŋa omiyo onen woko ka male? bot jone. 	I have become its servant by the commission God gave me to present to you the word of God in its fullness—
Wuwek lok pa Kricito obed i iwu mulony, ka wupwonnye, kun wujukke bene kekenwu ki ryeko ducu ma Lubaŋa omiyowu. Dok bene ka wuwero jabuli, wer me pako Lubaŋa ki wer mogo mukene me dini, wuwer bot Lubaŋa ki pwoc i cwinywu. 	And over all these virtues put on love, which binds them all together in perfect unity.
en pyem pe en aye ma ekwallo 	he objected that he was not the one who stole 
anyira mapol pou nonggo gitye i kin mwaka 14 ki 15, mukene acel acelle pong ma nonggo mwaka bene pud peya orommo 14 	most girls become fully grown and mature (as characterised by the presence of menses) between the ages of 14 and 15, other few ones become fully grown when they have not yet reached 14
Ticwu myero pe obed tic ma yeŋo waŋ keken me yomo cwiny dano, ento myero wuti gin ma Lubaŋa mito ki cwinywu ducu, macalo wun lutic pa Kricito. 	Slaves, obey your earthly masters with respect and fear, and with sincerity of heart, just as you would obey Christ.
ryemmo dano nono i dong ticce mape oballo gin mo nyo otimmo gin mo ma rac lok marac mada 	dismissing a person from his work without him spoiling something or doing something bad is a very serious matter 
gweno gitye ka bekko kwkii ki i wii odur 	chicken are pecking grubs from the rubbish heap
Onyac otwoyo maleriya twatwal 	Onyac has suffered too much from malaria
Iyo, wuŋut, wudwog cen, wek balwu gijwa woko, wek nino me yweyo ma a ki bot Rwot obin botwu, 	Repent, then, and turn to God, so that your sins may be wiped out, that times of refreshing may come from the Lord,
unne me pitto litinone kene 	suffering of feeding his children alone 
pe iwek moo kenynyo koni oo motto i bataniya 	do not leave the oil there, it will pour out and soak the blanket
kun wacci, “Pe wubal lobo nyo nam kadi ki yadi, nio waŋ ma doŋ waketo lanyut i tur nyim lutic pa Lubaŋawa.” 	“Do not harm the land or the sea or the trees until we put a seal on the foreheads of the servants of our God.”
gulocco dyanggi macol ki motor ka dong gucwallo 	the cattle were put in line in alternate colour of black and white before they were sent 
cwec pe myero ki dano macek 	fatness is not good for a short person 
“Cik mewa ŋolo kop i kom dano kun peya giwinyo lok ma a i doge, pi niaŋ i kom gin ma en timo?” 	Nicodemus, who had gone to Jesus earlier and who was one of their own number, asked,
lwong jane maca obin botta 	call that slave to come to me
wer me pakko Lubaga 	hymns or songs for praising God
ikello kikopo adii?	how many cups have you brought?
Nen, doŋ gitenyo otwu botwu, iye odoŋ nono. 	“Jerusalem, Jerusalem, you who kill the prophets and stone those sent to you, how often I have longed to gather your children together, as a hen gathers her chicks under her wings, and you were not willing.
lacone pe cammo maber owekko dong tye ma pel pel mada 	the man does not eat very well that is why he is too much wasted 
latinni doki jirro twatwal  	this child sneezes too much
limme twerro tinne 	the money can be economised 
twoo ma makko litino kare ki kare 	the disease that frequently attacks the children
e ee pe gicoyo kit meno 	no nono it is not written like that
lewic oneko balaturu	shyness killls balaturu
dok gubolo lalukanagi i nyim komker kun giwero ni, 	They lay their crowns before the throne and say:
Gubwoto yo ma atir, gurwenyo woko ata. Gulubo yo pa Balaam wod pa Beor, ma yam maro lim ma onoŋo pi timo gin marac, 	They have left the straight way and wandered off to follow the way of Balaam son of Bezer, who loved the wages of wickedness.
Can ki remcwiny bidiyo dano ducu ma timo gin marac, mukwoŋo Lujudaya ka doŋ jo Grik bene. 	But for those who are self-seeking and who reject the truth and follow evil, there will be wrath and anger.
lok adiya diya ma paco en aye ogegga binno	pressure or problems at home prevented me to come
Ka cabit doŋ okato, ci Maliam Lamagdala ki Maliam min Yakobo, ki Calume guwilo aŋwece pi wot kwede ka wiro kom Yecu. 	When the Sabbath was over, Mary Magdalene, Mary the mother of James, and Salome bought spices so that they might go to anoint Jesus’ body.
cel ringo me amwodda 	fry the meat for eating
giyorro pii i wii latwoo ma owille wek ocoo 	the water was sprinkled or poured on the head of the unconscious patient so that he might gain his consciousness
tekko litino ma gitye ka Iweny 	stopping the children who are fighting
gar kama palaa tye iye 	find out where the knife is 
mupira leela man twerro pikke 	the tube of this bicycle can be inflated 
Wun bene wudi cwinywu, wucuŋ matek, pien dwogo pa Rwot doŋ cok. 	You too, be patient and stand firm, because the Lord’s coming is near.
ka lyerre maber pe kany ma watwero lyerre iye 	there is no good swinging place here where we can swing 
pali macek 	a pair of short trousers 
Dok utmegiwa mapolle gengi omedde i kom Rwot pi bedona i buc, omiyo gitito lok pa Lubaŋa ki tekcwiny madwoŋ twatwal, laboŋo lworo. 	As a result, it has become clear throughout the whole palace guard and to everyone else that I am in chains for Christ.
guribbo donggi woko ka acel 	they have agreed together
pik odilo man me agoya koni otyeno 	inflate this ball to play with this afternoon
Dok gupenyo dano ma yam onoŋo waŋe oto-ni ni, “In itamo lok aŋo i kome, pien oyabo waŋi?” En odok iye ni, “En lanebi.” 	Some of the Pharisees said, “This man is not from God, for he does not keep the Sabbath.” But others asked, “How can a sinner perform such signs?” So they were divided.
Koŋ doki awac ni, ŋat mo pe opar ni an lamiŋ	Their end will be what their actions deserve.
Lacen openyogi ni, “Tara mono gikelo i ot me auma ki aduku, nyo me aketa i te kitanda? Pe gicibo i wi okar? 	He said to them, “Do you bring in a lamp to put it under a bowl or a bed? Instead, don’t you put it on its stand?
Kit meno Yucepu ma nyiŋe me aryone lukwena gucako ni Barnaba (ma te lokke ni ŋat ma jiŋo cwiny dano), Lalevi ma ginywalo i Caiprac, 	Joseph, a Levite from Cyprus, whom the apostles called Barnabas (which means “son of encouragement”),
rik ot maber ka dong imwon 	fill up the gaps between the big poles with the small ones and tie them and then plaster it with mud
Pi meno utmegiwa, wucuŋ matek, wumak kit ma wapwonyowu kwede, i lok nyo ki waraga. 	So then, brothers and sisters, stand firm and hold fast to the teachings we passed on to you, whether by word of mouth or by letter.
lok ma wuwinyo pe mera, ento pa Won ma ceŋ oora. 	Anyone who does not love me will not obey my teaching
Aŋeyo atir ni wun jo mabeco twatwal, wutye ki ŋec muromo, dok bene wutwero pwonnye giwu kekenwu. 	May the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace as you trust in him, so that you may overflow with hope by the power of the Holy Spirit.
gucitto ka cwiiyo tig a a 	they went to suck left over of local brew or dregs with tubes from a pot
ngayo latwoo i wii kitanda 	placing the patient, with the face upwards 
Ka kare me pwono nyig olok doŋ onyiko cok, ci ocwalo luticce bot lupur ka kelo nyig olokke. 	And even after you saw this, you did not repent and believe him.
Jo mapol gubino bote	Again they tried to seize him, but he escaped their grasp.
Abako doga bot ludoŋo ma gitye i kinwu, an ma ladit wadiwu ma abedo caden i can pa Kricito, dok bene abiribbe kwedwu i deyone ma binen. 	Grace to all who love our Lord Jesus Christ with an undying love.
Pien ŋat ma pe lakworwa, en aye lawotwa. 	for whoever is not against us is for us.
nyel twok meja ne woko 	cut or trim the sharp end of the table 
yab doggola  	open the door
latin owangge marac mada  	the child burnt himself very badly
pik pii i cupa 	fill the bottle with water
Pien wan wabedo jo ma ribbe ki Kricito, ka ce wamoko matek i genwa mukwoŋo nio wa i agikki, 	We have come to share in Christ, if indeed we hold our original conviction firmly to the very end.
Pi meno wudi cwinywu, pien an ageno Lubaŋa, aŋeyo ni bitimme kit ma giwaco bota-ni. 	So keep up your courage, men, for I have faith in God that it will happen just as he told me.
kono yang muganga pekke man kono pud dano gitye ka lweny ki tong, atero ki palaa keken 	if the gun powder was not here, the people would still be fighting with spears, arrows and knives only 
Ento Lubaŋa yam oyera wa con, oketa woko pat ma onoŋo pud peya ginywala, ka dok olwoŋa gire pi kicane. 	I was advancing in Judaism beyond many of my own age among my people and was extremely zealous for the traditions of my fathers.
Ci tinanena mo mukene dok onen i polo, min kulu mo makwar madit otuc, ma onoŋo wiye tye abiro, ki tuŋe tye apar, kun onoŋo lalukana abiro me loc tye i wiye ducu. 	Then another sign appeared in heaven: an enormous red dragon with seven heads and ten horns and seven crowns on its heads.
latin tye ka kok pien cugu lug okaye 	the child is crying because she was bitten by black ants
wii ot ma giummo ki lum abii rii mada pi kare malac	the hut's roof covered with the abii grass lasts a long time
Meno aye gin mumiyo walego Lubaŋa piwu nino ducu, wek en omi wubed jo ma myero ma kwowu rwatte ki lwoŋo ma en olwoŋowu kwede, wek Lubaŋa okonywu ki tekone me cobo mitwu ducu mabeco ki tic ducu ma wutiyo pi niye. 	With this in mind, we constantly pray for you, that our God may make you worthy of his calling, and that by his power he may bring to fruition your every desire for goodness and your every deed prompted by faith.
Pien Rwotwa ma giloko lok magi i kome-ni obedo dano me kaka mukene, ma ŋat mo i kingi peya otiyo tic mo i kom keno tyer. 	He of whom these things are said belonged to a different tribe, and no one from that tribe has ever served at the altar.
gumyello labonggo ywee 	they danced continuously without rest 
pien nino madit me akemogi doŋ oo, ci aŋa ma bitwero cuŋ iye?”	For the great day of their wrath has come, and who can withstand it?”
nywarro dano pe ber 	to abuse people is not good 
Dano ma waco ni etye i leŋo kun dag ominne, noŋo pud tye i colpiny aye. 	Anyone who claims to be in the light but hates a brother or sister is still in the darkness.
latinne pe ngeyo lwokke nino ducu Iwokke labac labac 	the child does not know how to bathe himself, he always partially bathes himself !his child does not know how to bathe himself, he always partially bathes himself
bot nyako ma peya oŋeyo laco, ma laco ma nyiŋe Yucepu otoŋo keny i kome	to a virgin pledged to be married to a man named Joseph, a descendant of David
ka opyelo i lyelle kikome manyen, ma yam onoŋo okwinyo oroko i i got	Joseph took the body, wrapped it in a clean linen cloth,
ento ka kare oromo ma lamalaika me abiro bikuto tumme, Lubaŋa bicobo tamme ma tye i muŋ kit macalo yam otito bot luticce lunebi.” 	But in the days when the seventh angel is about to sound his trumpet, the mystery of God will be accomplished, just as he announced to his servants the prophets.”
Man omiyo i kom laco acel, ma yam rom ki ŋat muto, oa iye lwak likwayo mapol ata calo lakalatwe me polo, ki dok calo kweyo me dog nam ma kwanone loyo dano woko-ni. 	And so from this one man, and he as good as dead, came descendants as numerous as the stars in the sky and as countless as the sand on the seashore.
atamo doŋ en bibino ka ce onoŋo kare maber. 	He was quite unwilling to go now, but he will go when he has the opportunity.
ngii kommi ki koyo 	get used to cold experience 
en tye ka gerro otte kwene? 	where is he building his house? 
apwoyo lok meeri    	I agree with what you said
atuna maaro makko wang awobe ki anyira 	styes frequently affect the youths
lok man ikko in keken 	this matter concerns only you 
royo nget gang 	firing grass round the home to prevent fire burning the home
tik tic men keken 	concentrate yourself on your own work only or occupy yourself with your work only
puno en aye lee ma wotto ki tyenne aryo callo dano, ento ka mitto wotto callo lee mukene ma giwotto ki tyengi agwen, ci nyonno gem ki gee cingge ma omiyo calo gunya 	gorilla is an animal which walks upright on two legs like human being, but when it wants to walk like other animals which walk on four legs, he walks on the backs of the closed fingers like chimpanzees 
gweno tye ka gwokko latinne 	the chicken is looking after its chick
tengge woko liweng igang 	all gone away leaving the home empty 
okwero pwony cito ki cet ka pa maro	he who rejects advice goes to his mother-in-law's homestead with his heels soiled by excreta
twany del wangge ka wek i nen maber 	turn the eyelids inside out in order to examine well 
odonynyo i ot oketto jami olokkongi ducu atata 	he entered the house and pushed things all over the places and turned them upside down
Lwak dano madwoŋ gulube, ki mon mapol ma gikumo kun gikok pire. 	A large number of people followed him, including women who mourned and wailed for him.
Wuweko cik pa Lubaŋa, kun wuketo cwinywu ka lubo kit pa dano.” 	You have let go of the commands of God and are holding on to human traditions.”
kom dyang ma obeddo callo kicaa ma lyerre ikin em aryo ma kello cak 	a tissue from the cow which is like a bag and hangs down between the thighs that produces milk
gwokke odok ma i kom doggola ni koni patte woko i kom bongoni 	take care, the glue that is on the door might get stuck on your clothes
Ka an aryemo cen pi twero pa Beeljebul, ci litinowu kono giryemo cen pi twero pa aŋa? Pi meno gin aye gibibedo luŋolkopwu. 	Now if I drive out demons by Beelzebul, by whom do your followers drive them out? So then, they will be your judges.
ot ma gigerro ki gweng ma girubbo ki cementi tek mada 	a house built with a mixer of pebble and cement is very strong 
ryanyo kwon	to make a big amount of kwon
Bok pok yat man matye i kom dul yat ma gigunnoni ma yom wek odok me bongo 	beat thoroughly the bark on this cut piece of wood to become very soft for cloth
wiye lik 	he is slow 
tye ka rwanggo cupiria ma pe gibecco woke 	is crushing the bad sauce 
Wuki wuleg Lubaŋa, wek pe wudony i abita mo	“Watch and pray so that you will not fall into temptation
imakko atabone abuny eno gwok koni pot woko	you have precariously held the bowel, it might fall off
Aŋeyo ni dano meno yam gitiŋe malo gitere wa i Paradic. (Ka ce Lubaŋa otiŋo kome, gwok nyo omiye oleko aleka, pe aŋeyo, ento Lubaŋa ŋeyo.) 	Although there is nothing to be gained, I will go on to visions and revelations from the Lord.
En yam pe oweko lobo i kare macon, ento ogwoko Nua keken, latit lok me kit ma atir, kacel ki jo mukene abiro, i kare ma yam en ocwalo pii aluka wek omwony lobo pa jo ma pe gilworo Lubaŋa woko. 	if he did not spare the ancient world when he brought the flood on its ungodly people, but protected Noah, a preacher of righteousness, and seven others;
Yecu odokke iye ni, “A, ikwany gibutoni, iciti.” 	When Jesus saw him lying there and learned that he had been in this condition for a long time, he asked him, “Do you want to get well?”
Pien ajwaka madit ma watye kwede pe obedo ŋat ma pe winyo arem kacel kwedwa pi gorowa, pien en bene Catan yam obite i yo ducu calo wan, ento en pe omedo ki timo bal mo. 	For we do not have a high priest who is unable to empathize with our weaknesses, but we have one who has been tempted in every way, just as we are—yet he did not sin.
litinowa ma polle gucitto woko i tim 	most of our children have gone away, abroad or overseas 
ka ibeddo ka gukko tic agukka ci ibinenno can mada i nino ma anyim 	if you go on doing one job and then leaving it and doing another and leaving it not steady in your job you will suffer very much in future
bataniya man twerro banne ma rommo donynyo i canduk 	this blanket can be folded to enter into the box
komme obeddo agec lure 	its body is speckled like that of alligator or monitor lizard
blanket en aye gin me ummo kom dyewor, ma gicweyo ki pamba nyo yer 	a blanket is a large cover, which is made of either cotton or wool used for covering the body at night
kun iŋeyo ni, kodi dano-nu doŋ oŋak woko, dok obalo, ki doŋ oŋolo kop woko i kome kene. 	so that, having been justified by his grace, we might become heirs having the hope of eternal life.
latet meyo nyonyo me atteta 	the blacksmith melts the iron for forging
Ka gubino bot Yecu, gubako doggi bote ki cwinygi ducu kun giwaco ni, “En ber, myero itimme man, 	When they came to Jesus, they pleaded earnestly with him, “This man deserves to have you do this,
tep me wer kanica tye kwene, amitto ketto wek awiny?	where is the tape for the church hymns, I want to put it into music system so that I may hear them
burre tuut mada 	the hole is very deep
ki yeya mukene bene onoŋo tye kacel kwedgi. 	There were also other boats with him.
giterro I lakap 	taken to be locked up
cwinynye pukke me timmo gin mo 	there is a strong impelling feeling which seems to urge him to do something
yeng cwaa wek nyigge opot piny 	shake the tamarind tree so that the fruits may drop down 
yat ma girubbo ni ka imatto tag callo kado atwonna 	the mixture of the medicine when you drink it, it tastes like alkaline salt or ash
jo mogo gubino gupenye ni, “Piŋo lupwonnye pa Jon ki pa Luparicayo giri kec, ento lupwonnyeni pe giri kec?” 	Some people came and asked Jesus, “How is it that John’s disciples and the disciples of the Pharisees are fasting, but yours are not?”
goddo gutte ka neno winyo i gee ot	to stretch his neck to see the bird behind the house 
Ka Cira ki Temceo gua ki i Makedonia, gunoŋo Paulo ogeto ka tito lok kun tito ki Lujudaya ni Kricito ma Lubaŋa oyero-ni aye Yecu. 	When Silas and Timothy came from Macedonia, Paul devoted himself exclusively to preaching, testifying to the Jews that Jesus was the Messiah.
Mi kareni me kwano coc ma yam gicoyo i nyim lwak, i tito lok, ki i pwony, nio ka abino kunnu. 	Don’t let anyone look down on you because you are young, but set an example for the believers in speech, in conduct, in love, in faith and in purity.
Ka oa ki ka lega, obino bot lupwonynye, onoŋo gunino woko pi cwercwiny, 	When he rose from prayer and went back to the disciples, he found them asleep, exhausted from sorrow.
Ento wun utmegina, yam pe onoŋo atwero lok kwedwu calo jo ma tye ki Cwiny pa Lubaŋa, ento aloko kwedwu macalo jo ma pud tye ki kit ma ginywalogi kwede, macalo litino lukere i Kricito. 	Brothers and sisters, I could not address you as people who live by the Spirit but as people who are still worldly—mere infants in Christ.
cak potto woko ka pe gimurro 	the milk goes bad if it is not boiled
obeddo ni cany caa do 	he is comfortably sifting there 
Ento amito wuŋe ni wi laco acel acel en aye Kricito, wi dako aye cware, ki wi Kricito aye Lubaŋa. 	But I want you to realize that the head of every man is Christ, and the head of the woman is man, and the head of Christ is God.
latin pudi wotto ni nyem nyem 	the baby still walks unsteadily and slowly
Pien Lubaŋa pe oketo lobo ma mito bino ma wan waloko pire-ni i te loc pa lumalaika. 	It is not to angels that he has subjected the world to come, about which we are speaking.
Gin ma miyo wabedo ki gen i kome en ene ni, ka walegge gin mo kun walubo gin ma en mito, ci en winyo legawa. 	This is the confidence we have in approaching God: that if we ask anything according to his will, he hears us.
joo mabeddo i lobo ma ceng lyet iye twatwal gipikko pii amatagi i opiro pien pe miyo pii beddo lyet 	the people who live in the desert keep their drinking water in leather bags because they keep the water cool
nyut kit yoo me nonggo jami meno 	indicate the way of finding out such things
twoo nyamucuna en aye twoo ma maaakko litino twatwal, cake ki lyeto ka lacen dong kom latin cakko onynyo 	chicken pox is a disease of children, it starts with fever and then later followed by crops of spots or rashes on the child
wangge odwet  	he has weeping eyes
dog latin ojot ki papai ma ocammo	the child's mouth is smeared with pawpaw which she ate 
en ngeyo lok me yiire mada 	he knows very much about bewitching and charming 
Ka Rwot owaco bote ni, ‘Luny war woko ki i tyeni, pien kabedo ma in icuŋ iye-ni ŋom maleŋ. 	“Then the Lord said to him, ‘Take off your sandals, for the place where you are standing is holy ground.
acikari citto kwedgi ajuro i kare ma gukello ayella	the police went to wrest them strightaway when they brought trouble
wek doŋ wager aduc adek, acel meri, acel pa Moses, ki acel pa Elia.” 	Let us put up three shelters—one for you, one for Moses and one for Elijah.”
otwogo ajot jot	a fattish green grasshopper
Ci lacen aneno lumalaika abiro ma gicuŋ i nyim Lubaŋa kare ki kare, gimiyo botgi tum abiro. 	And I saw the seven angels who stand before God, and seven trumpets were given to them.
litino gimaarro cammo pwomo mada 	children love very much to suck passion fruits
Ento ka latic meno oloko kekene ni, ‘Laditta doŋ ogalle ka bino’, 	But suppose that servant is wicked and says to himself, ‘My master is staying away a long time,’
nweng yat wek ipwon muyembe 	climb the mango tree and pick up the fruits 
ywee wek cwinynyi kong opyee 	rest until you have composed yourself
I kare ma Lubaŋa cikke bot Abraim, kit macalo pe tye ŋat mo ma kate-ni ki dit ma myero en okwoŋ ki nyiŋe, en okwoŋo ki nyiŋe kekene, 	When God made his promise to Abraham, since there was no one greater for him to swear by, he swore by himself,
Pi niye Enoka yam gitiŋo gitero woko malo wek pe obil to. Pe gimedo ki noŋone, pien Lubaŋa onoŋo doŋ otere woko. I kare ma pud peya gitere, gimiyo lok me caden i kome, ni oyomo cwiny Lubaŋa. 	By faith Enoch was taken from this life, so that he did not experience death: “He could not be found, because God had taken him away.” For before he was taken, he was commended as one who pleased God.
latin man onenno can ma kare pe ka wet ki tyene nia wa Kitgum ni oo wa kany 	the child suffered very much to walk on foot from Kitgum up to here
pokko cam ki dano	to distribute food to the people
Doŋ waorogi kacel ki ominwa mukene ma wabedo ka temo kite pi kare malac, ci wanoŋo ni en obedo dano ma keto cwinye i kom tic mapol, ento i kare-ni doŋ tye ka keto cwinye matek twatwal makato ma yam con, pi gen madit ma en tye kwede i komwu. 	For we are taking pains to do what is right, not only in the eyes of the Lord but also in the eyes of man.
welle cilig abic 	its price is five shillings
En koŋ bedo i te loc pa jo ma gwoke ki jo ma gwoko jamine, nio ka kare ma wonne ociko oromo. 	What I am saying is that as long as an heir is underage, he is no different from a slave, although he owns the whole estate.
jiggo kola ka tiyo gin me 	determination to do something 
moko lye i ot 	some are in the house
cit ka yweyo i England 	go for a holiay in England
Orwone okwanyo lim, omiyo bot ŋat ma gwoko ot welo, ocike ni, ‘Twoye	The next day he took out two denarii and gave them to the innkeeper
pancura pa rwot tin gumakko dano mape guonynyo mucoro 	the chief's policemen today arrested the people who have not paid taxes  
pen en aye oceke ma aa ki i kom latin ci donynyo i pel man en aye oceke ma term cam ki remo ma aa ki ikom mine 	pen is a tube called umbilical cord which comes from the child to the placenta in the mother's womb, it is this tube that takes food and blood to the child from the mother
ajoga gimaarro cammone i dwee me abicel ki abiro noggo nyim dong otum woko	sauce without simsim mixed in it is usually eaten in the months of June and July when the simsim is finished
ul pamba ma i dyee ot odok tung cel wek owek ka beddo ki dano 	all the people moved to one side
Oriŋo anyim, oito i wi yat olam wek enen, pien Yecu onoŋo oewok ki i yo-nu. 	So he ran ahead and climbed a sycamore-fig tree to see him, since Jesus was coming that way.
joo mapol ducu gitiyo luduku me konynye pi mit me pire kene 	all the people use the gun for their selfish needs 
“Wubineno can, wun lupwony-cik ki Luparicayo, wun lugoba! Pien wuloro doggola me ker me polo woko bot dano	For those who exalt themselves will be humbled, and those who humble themselves will be exalted.
pancura pa rwot tin gumakko dano mape guonynyo mucoro 	the chief's policemen today arrested the people who have not paid taxes  
gunynyo yito 	blowing out smoke
wonne otuc mapudi peya gucakko cam me dye ceng 	the father arrived suddenly before they had started lunch
tuwa tye i Patiko 	our home is in Patiko
Man en gin ma ŋat ma oora mito, ni i kom dano ducu ma en omiya awek rwenyo iye ŋatti mo, ento acergi woko ducu i nino me agik. 	For I have come down from heaven not to do my will but to do the will of him who sent me.
piŋo wuwinyo lokke?” 	Many of them said, “He is demon-possessed and raving mad
Wari pi nino mapol ma pe waneno ceŋ nyo lakalatwe, yamo bene obedo ka kodo mager twatwal, ci lacen pe doŋ wabedo ki gen mo ni wabilarre. 	When neither sun nor stars appeared for many days and the storm continued raging, we finally gave up all hope of being saved.
arwot ki oda	i am chief in my own house
nen ka olorro dong canduk maber 	go and see whether he has shut the door of the box well
Gukiye ka nyo bicaŋe i ceŋ cabit, wek gikel kop i kome. 	Some of them were looking for a reason to accuse Jesus, so they watched him closely to see if he would heal him on the Sabbath.
latinne lagama mada pe beddo piny mot, caa ducu beddo ka ballo jami 	the child is an imbecile, he cannot sit down quietly but all the time spoiling things 
bed piny kany i tee baraja ikurra 	sit here on the verandah and wait for me
Lapur odokke iye ni, ‘Ladit, koŋ iwek obed pi mwaka man doki, nio ka abako ŋom i tere, aonyo iye cet dyaŋ mutwo. 	“‘Sir,’ the man replied, ‘leave it alone for one more year, and I’ll dig around it and fertilize it.
gibiywayowu giterowu i nyim luloc ki luker-gu pira, wubitito lok ma bedo caden botgi ki bot Lurok bene. 	On my account you will be brought before governors and kings as witnesses to them and to the Gentiles.
Wuŋeyo ni Kricito yam onen wek ekwany bal woko	But you know that he appeared so that he might take away our sins
wek dano mo pe owakke i nyim Lubaŋa. 	so that no one may boast before him.
Ka dok guwoto anyim manok, ci oneno Yakobo ki ominne Jon, gin awobe pa Jebedayo, ma onoŋo gitye i yeya ka lubo obwo recgi. 	When he had gone a little farther, he saw James son of Zebedee and his brother John in a boat, preparing their nets.
Ka wakwaŋ waa ki kunnu ci orwone wakemo Kioc	The next day we set sail from there and arrived off Chios
Gin aŋo makato meno ma dok amedde me lokone? Pien kare aye bibedo nok bota me tittiwu pi Gideon, Barak, Samson, Jeputa, Daudi, Camuel ki lunebi-gu, 	And what more shall I say? I do not have time to tell about Gideon, Barak, Samson and Jephthah, about David and Samuel and the prophets,
tye i i canduk 	it is in the box
cit Men ka dong ane olorre 	go and see whether the door is shut
gitye ka patto kom ot ki lobo 	they are building the house by throwing the mud or clay 
muyembe onyak ni gogo 	the mangoes are fully ripe and hanging all around
nyako omiyo bot minne. 	He presented it to the girl, and she gave it to her mother.
obeddo piny ni rwee 	he sat down quietly, silently, and completely lost 
labbo kweyo woko ki bel	to wash the corn with water to remove the sand from it
lakit bonggi ma ocokko ikome ki ma otweyo i wiye dong nen collo jwee 	the types of clothes which she wore on her body and the one on her head, made her look like a queer human form
jami man mere twerro cwalle botti  	these things can be sent to you
Ci boŋo kicika ma i ot pa Lubaŋa ocako yec woko opokke dul aryo, oyec ki malo, nio kwede wa i tere piny. 	The curtain of the temple was torn in two from top to bottom.
wangge opalle  	he has got squint or has cross eyes
bin oyot oyot 	come quickly 
ngat mape ngeyo legga nonggo wiye pe tye maber	anybody who does not know how to pray something must be wrong with his head
“Ka cen marac doŋ oa ki i kom dano mo, ci cito wirre i kabedo ma pii pe iye kun yenyo ka ma ebiywe iye	“When an impure spirit comes out of a person, it goes through arid places seeking rest and does not find it
Aŋa mono ma loyo lobo? Pe ŋat ma ye ni, Yecu aye Wod pa Lubaŋa? 	Who is it that overcomes the world? Only the one who believes that Jesus is the Son of God.
Dok bene alego ni en omeny tamwu, wek wuniaŋ i kom gen ma en olwoŋowu iye, ki i kom mot me lonyo ki deyo madwoŋ ma en miyo bot jone wek obed megi matwal. 	I have not stopped giving thanks for you, remembering you in my prayers.
tic me ywekko jammi tek mada lutic mitto cukku cwinygi 	the work of carrying things is very hard, the workers need to be urged 
Rwot Lubaŋa bimiye komker pa kwarone Daudi. 	The Lord God will give him the throne of his father David,
Ci dwan ocako winnye ma a ki i polo ma wacci, “Man aye Woda ma amare, ma cwinya yom i kome.”	At that moment heaven was opened, and he saw the Spirit of God descending like a dove and alighting on him.
Ci owaco bot dano-nu ni, “Rye badi.” Dano-nu oryeyo bade, ci bade ocaŋ woko maber odoko calo mukene-ni. 	How much more valuable is a person than a sheep! Therefore it is lawful to do good on the Sabbath.”
komme obeddo abac abac	its body is spotted 
gu aa ka kwang	they have come from swimming
Amedo cuko cwinywu ni wuleg Lubaŋa, wek odwoka botwu oyotoyot. 	I particularly urge you to pray so that I may be restored to you soon.
pe kionynyo ka lar ata i gin mape kong iniang iye maber 	do not join in a dispute which you have not understood very well
Medo i kom gin jami mukene-gu ducu, tye gin acel ma kelo peko bota kare ki kare, en aye par ma atye kwede pi jo muye Kricito i kabedo mapatpat ducu. 	Five times I received from the Jews the forty lashes minus one.
omiyogi cam 	he gave them food 
Dok omedde kwede ni, “Ada awacciwu ni, lanebi mo pe ma gijole i lobo tugi. 	“Truly I tell you,” he continued, “no prophet is accepted in his hometown.
Pien Wod pa dano tye ka wot kit man pi cobo kit ma gicoyo i kome-ni	The Son of Man will go just as it is written about him
en bipoŋ ki Cwiny Maleŋ, nia i i minne. 	He is never to take wine or other fermented drink, and he will be filled with the Holy Spirit even before he is born.
Ka pud giwinyo lok man, Yecu omedde ki lokke, obolo botgi carolok, pien onoŋo doŋ cok ki Jerucalem, dok pien onoŋo gitamo ni ker pa Lubaŋa binen cutcut. 	While they were listening to this, he went on to tell them a parable, because he was near Jerusalem and the people thought that the kingdom of God was going to appear at once.
tungu potto ni pip 	the borassus palm fruit falls heavily to the ground
Ento atye ki lok mogo manoknok i komi, pien itye ki jo mogo kunnu ma gumako pwony pa Balaam, ma yam opwonyo Balak me keto ariya i nyim jo Icrael wek gupot i bal, kun obitogi ni gucam riŋo ma gityero bot jogi, ki me timo tim tarwaŋ. 	Nevertheless, I have a few things against you: There are some among you who hold to the teaching of Balaam, who taught Balak to entice the Israelites to sin so that they ate food sacrificed to idols and committed sexual immorality.
maara maarra mada 	my mother-in-law loves me very much
pe angeyo kama abollo iye ciling abic	I do not know where I dropped the five shillings
Lamalaika me abic oonyo gin ma i i atabone woko i kom komker pa lee ca, ci kerre doŋ ocako bedo i colpiny	The fifth angel poured out his bowl on the throne of the beast, and its kingdom was plunged into darkness
Dano ducu gucito ka cone, ŋat acel acel i gaŋgi. 	And everyone went to their own town to register.
dok giye ni in iora. 	For I gave them the words you gave me and they accepted them
Ŋat ma pe tiŋo yatariyane, kun luba, pe twero bedo lapwonnyena. 	And whoever does not carry their cross and follow me cannot be my disciple.
Yecu odokke iye ni, “Petero, awacci ni, tin twon gweno pe bikok, nio waŋ ma ikwera tyen adek ni pe iŋeya.” 	Jesus answered, “I tell you, Peter, before the rooster crows today, you will deny three times that you know me.”
pee iony pii madowong i dek miyo kile woko 	one frog can stir up the water and makes it dirty, meaning one bad act can spoil things
Ka doŋ meno otum, ma noŋo doŋ atyeko miyo botgi gin ma gijogo pigi, ci abiwok ki botwu ka doŋ akato acito i Cipein. 	For Macedonia and Achaia were pleased to make a contribution for the poor among the Lord’s people in Jerusalem.
guggo kong ka wek latin gibyel i geye 	she should first bend so that a child may be tied on her back 
Dano gubedo ka woro min kulu ca pien onoŋo omiyo twerone woko bot lee-nu, dok bene guworo lee-nu kun giwacci, “Aŋa ma obedo calo lee man, dok aŋa ma twero lweny kwede?” 	People worshiped the dragon because he had given authority to the beast, and they also worshiped the beast and asked, “Who is like the beast? Who can wage war against it?”
Ento ka watye ki cam ki ginaruka, jami magi romowa gire. 	For we brought nothing into the world, and we can take nothing out of it.
ogera gin aye gitye ka cammo anyogi man 	the grivet monkeys are the ones which are eating the maize in this field
Doŋ ka atiyo gin ma pe amito, noŋo aye ni cik ber. 	Did that which is good, then, become death to me? By no means! Nevertheless, in order that sin might be recognized as sin, it used what is good to bring about my death, so that through the commandment sin might become utterly sinful.
Ci latic owaco ni, ‘Ladit, watimo gin ma iciko, ento kabedo gire pud tye.’ 	“‘Sir,’ the servant said, ‘what you ordered has been done, but there is still room.’
tur gin anenna bene kello layido 	flowers also cause dermatitis
terru kaal wii pero ka twoo iye	take the millet to the platform to dry
aboce gicammo i kare me kec	aboce tuber is eaten in the time of famine
gunywanno Otto ki lok ma pol omiyo pe dong otitto lok maber i kot 	they confused Otto with many words that made him unable to give good evidence in court
tong witte i kom lee ci pe cubbo 	the spear bounced on the animal, and did not spear 
Ka nene tye kit meno, kono gitum pe doŋ ogik woko? Kono jo ma woro Lubaŋa doŋ gilwoko balgi woko matwal, kono pe dok gimedde me bedo ki kit ŋec mo i cwinygi ni gin lubalo. 	Otherwise, would they not have stopped being offered? For the worshipers would have been cleansed once for all, and would no longer have felt guilty for their sins.
obakko dogge pi roc ma otimmo 	he begged for forgiveness for the mistakes that he made
latinne pud odwoggo laworo ki i tim 	his child just came back yesterday from abroad
kabad man mitto awirra wek olok nyimme odok tung ieye 	this cupboard needs to be turned round to face its back
en nino ducu mitto teerro korre 	he always wants to show his strength
twol ogali ringgo ma onto wiye ki Butte malo 	cobra runs with its neck and head raised up
En owaco kit man, lacen owaco botgi ni, “Laremwa Lajaro doŋ onino, acito wek acicoye woko ki i waŋ nino.” 	It is when a person walks at night that they stumble, for they have no light.”
Utmegina, alegowu ni wudi cwinywu i lokka ma acoyo manoknok mo-ni ma acuko kwede cwinywu. 	Brothers and sisters, I urge you to bear with my word of exhortation, for in fact I have written to you quite briefly.
Pien nyig ma onyak pi ceŋ nen woko i gin ducu ma tye maber, dok atir, ki me ada. 	Live as children of light
En otamo ni yet ma giciro pi Kricito obedo lonyo madit makato lonyo ducu ma tye i Ejipt, pien onoŋo ociko waŋe kun neno mot me kare me anyim. 	He regarded disgrace for the sake of Christ as of greater value than the treasures of Egypt, because he was looking ahead to his reward.
kel tol me kwoyo bongo 	bring thread for sewing clothes 
laworo abwora bonyo oo ma ceng dong tye abwora, ento madowongge oo tin	part of the locusts arrived yesterday afternoon but the main part arrives today
jooni gitye ka reene mada ki rangi matar i kom yadi ma gicommogi i nget yoo 	those people are painting the poles planted along the road with white colour
pien meno en aye gin mumiyo abino.	That is why I have come.”
dano gitye ka ringgo ni pii piri  	people are quickly running away
Pien konyo dano ma olimo lobo ducu ki gin aŋo kun kwone rwennye woko, nyo balle? 	What good is it for someone to gain the whole world, and yet lose or forfeit their very self?
giterro ladit ka penynyone 	the gentleman was taken for questioning
jami ma aa ki Buggereja bi oo i wang wat Mombaca diki 	things from England will arrive at Mombasa sea port tomorrow
remo obeddi ni wai i dye ot 	the floor was all covered with blood
rwatto ot nyo dero 	plastering the walls of hut or granary with clay
bot tyen lee tye kany 	animals foot marks are here 
Oyotoyot odwogo i ot bot kabaka ki mit kome, olege ni, “Amito imiya wi Jon Labatija i weer kombeddi.” 	At once the girl hurried in to the king with the request: “I want you to give me right now the head of John the Baptist on a platter.”
mad rate wang bur oketto iiwobi woko 	swabbing of the ulcer has overwhelmed the boy or the boy is overwhelmed by the swabbing of the ulcers
myerro wugwokke mada ka wucitto ka cubbo okoc jubi 	be very careful if you go to spear an old lone buffalo 
Doŋ pi man, myero wayelle me donyo i yweyo meno, wek omi ŋat mo pe dok opot woko pi kwero bedo ki winy calo gin. 	Let us, therefore, make every effort to enter that rest, so that no one will perish by following their example of disobedience.
Ci kica omako ladit i kom laticce-nu, ogonye woko dok oweko banyane bene. 	The servant’s master took pity on him, canceled the debt and let him go.
Ci cutcut gutugi weko obwogi, gulubo kore. 	At once they left their nets and followed him.
Meno omiyo doŋ atyeko tito lok me kwena maber i kom Kricito atika, cakke ki i Jerucalem, wok kwede wa i Illiriko	by the power of signs and wonders, through the power of the Spirit of God
Ci gin aryo-nu gicako doko kom acel.’ Gin pe dok gibedo kom aryo, doŋ gibedo kom acel keken. 	and the two will become one flesh.’ So they are no longer two, but one flesh.
Ŋat ma yam pe oŋeyo bal, Lubaŋa oloke odoko bal piwa, wek pire wadok jo ma nywako kit pa Lubaŋa ma tye atir.	We implore you on Christ’s behalf: Be reconciled to God.
lak tong man mitto apakka ka wek ocub lee maber 	the edge of this spear needs to be sharpened so that it may spear well the animals
wil wic owekko pe dong apoo i komme i kare ma pud anenne anenna 	forgetfulness made me not to remember him at the moment that I saw him
Yam ibedo ki co abic, man ma koni itye kwede-ni pe cwari	He told her, “Go, call your husband and come back.”
yelle mada ka kwanno lok Kiggereja 	trying very hard to learn study English
I kare meno lunebi mogo gua ki i Jerucalem gucito i Antiokia. 	During this time some prophets came down from Jerusalem to Antioch.
lapet piny nyo apetti 	a vagabond, a person who roams about aimlessly
meego ocitto kwene? 	where has mother gone? 
par pa latinne ma orweny woko ni tye ka nekke woko 	the sorrow for the loss ot his child is killing him 
ribbo lacoo ki dako i kanica 	joining a man and a woman in the church
Kono nene en tye i lobo kany, kono pe obedo ajwaka wacel, pien ajwagi doŋ tye ma gimiyo mot kun gilubo cik pa Moses. 	If he were on earth, he would not be a priest, for there are already priests who offer the gifts prescribed by the law.
Gikelo lewic i karamawu me mar ka gicamo matek mukato kare laboŋo lworo, kun giparo pi komgi keken. Gubedo calo pol ma pii pe iye ma yamo kolo	Woe to them! They have taken the way of Cain; they have rushed for profit into Balaam’s error; they have been destroyed in Korah’s rebellion.
I kare ma doŋ gitye ka cam, Yecu owaco botgi ni, “Ada, awaco botwu ni, ŋat acel i kinwu bidoba.” 	And while they were eating, he said, “Truly I tell you, one of you will betray me.”
punno lawotti pe ber	cheating your friend is not good 
Wan doŋ wadag kit ducu ma gikano, ki kit me lewic	Therefore, since through God’s mercy we have this ministry, we do not lose heart.
I kare meno kabaka Kerode oketo ciŋe i kom jo mogo i kin jo muye Kricito. 	It was about this time that King Herod arrested some who belonged to the church, intending to persecute them.
ticgi becco mada 	their work is very good 
bolle ma komme,mit amitta 	moves in a lively manner with alertness
juune ki ngwec matek mada ka cubbo lee 	running very fast to spear the animal 
cik mo pe ma kwero gin macalo magi. 	gentleness and self-control
Wacako kwaŋo nam ki i Teroa, wakwaŋ atir nio wa i Camotrake, ci orwone wao i Neapoli. 	From Troas we put out to sea and sailed straight for Samothrace, and the next day we went on to Neapolis.
Wun lutowaŋ ma lumiŋ! Gin mene ma pire dit kato, jabu nyo ot pa Lubaŋa ma omiyo jabu odoko maleŋ? 	“Woe to you, blind guides! You say, ‘If anyone swears by the temple, it means nothing; but anyone who swears by the gold of the temple is bound by that oath.’
mol pa piine twerro jwikke  	the flow of the water can be reduced or decreased
lyerro awal i kor ot 	suspending the gourd plate on the wall
ladit Ica potto pe ber 	it is not good for an elderly person to fall
Kunnu en onoŋo iye dano ma nyiŋe Ainea, ma yam obuto i wi kitanda mwaka aboro pi two akweya. 	There he found a man named Aeneas, who was paralyzed and had been bedridden for eight years.
Ento in dano pa Lubaŋa, leŋ yo ki jami meno, ket cwinyi i kit ma atir, i lworo Lubaŋa, i niye, i mar, i diyo cwiny ki i mwolo. 	Some people, eager for money, have wandered from the faith and pierced themselves with many griefs.
cul bur man  	block this hole
I kin cawa aboŋwen Yecu odaŋŋe ki dwan maloŋo ni, “Eloi, Eloi, lama cabaktani?” ma te lokke ni, “Lubaŋana, Lubaŋana, itenya woko piŋo?” 	From noon until three in the afternoon darkness came over all the land.
Jo muto mukene-gu ducu pe dok gubedo kwo, nio waŋ ma mwaka alip acel doŋ okato. Man aye cer mukwoŋo. 	(The rest of the dead did not come to life until the thousand years were ended.) This is the first resurrection.
Yecu ki lupwonnyene gua gucito i dog nam. Lwak madwoŋ ma gua i Galilaya gulube ki jo ma gua i Judaya, 	Jesus withdrew with his disciples to the lake, and a large crowd from Galilee followed.
yen man bor twatwal ngun woko 	this log is too long, cut it off
an pe alworro ngati mo wacel 	I do not fear anybody at all
tuddo dong woko 	joining together against someone
jok pa Patiko gilwonggo ni Baka 	the god of the Patiko is called Baka 
nia ma dakone ogammo iye, lacoo dong tikko beddo' gang keken 	since his wife conceived, the man now stays at home all the time 
Wun jo ducu ma doŋ gityeko batijawu i nyiŋ Kricito, doŋ wuruko Kricito macalo wuruko boŋowu. 	So in Christ Jesus you are all children of God through faith,
ocitto ka commo lakke i ot yat 	he went to the hospital to have a new tooth fixed 
goyo tanga i wii lee i nyim abila 	sprinkling of water mixed with flour on the head of a game in front of the shrine 
litino giyenggo yat ni tikitiki 	the children are shaking the tree about
an amitto labana kor lee keken ma wubinekkone, ringo mukene ducu wupok woko i kinwu 	I want only the sternum of the animal that you will kill, all the other meat divide them among yourselves 
panggo wii latin woko ki i kom dini	to divert the child away from religion
Waŋeyo ni gin ma cik oloko, loko bot jo ma tye i te cik, wek dano ducu guliŋ woko pe guŋam doggi ka lok, ki wi lobo ducu myero obed i tye ŋolo kop pa Lubaŋa. 	“There is no fear of God before their eyes.”
pien Wod pa dano pe obino ka tyeko kwo pa dano, ento pi larogi.”] Gucito i gaŋ mukene. 	Then he and his disciples went to another village.
Ajwagi madito pa Lubaŋa ki Luparicayo onoŋo doŋ guciko dano ni, ka ŋat mo oŋeyo ka ma en tye iye, myero onyuttigi, wek gimake.	They kept looking for Jesus, and as they stood in the temple courts they asked one another, “What do you think? Isn’t he coming to the festival at all?”
Ka guo i kabedo ma gilwoŋo Cogo Wic, gigure i kom yatariya kunnu, ki lutim maraco, ŋat acel tuŋ lacuc, ŋat acel tuŋ lacam. 	When they came to the place called the Skull, they crucified him there, along with the criminals—one on his right, the other on his left.
tiyo pii me lwokko cing 	pouring the water for washing the hands 
tye ka gabbo wang bongone 	he is mending his torn cloth roughly not stitching it properly
pien i kare ma Moses doŋ yam cok guro kema, Lubaŋa ocike ni, “Nen ni itiyo jami ducu kun ilubo kit cal ma ginyutti ki i wi got.” 	This is why Moses was warned when he was about to build the tabernacle: “See to it that you make everything according to the pattern shown you on the mountain.”
Ka ociko lwak, ci odonyo i yeya cutcut kacel ki lupwonnyene, ocito wa i lobo Dalmanuta. 	he got into the boat with his disciples and went to the region of Dalmanutha.
Cwiny Maleŋ onoŋo tye kwede. 	He was waiting for the consolation of Israel, and the Holy Spirit was on him.
ted dek wek gicam 	cook the food so that it may be eaten
bak moko me tobi 	put flour mixed with water to ferment to form leaven or yeast
jalle nanggo dongge mada ka tye ka cammo ringo ma moo	the fellow moves his mouth in and out and licks the lips when eating fatty food
ento awaco botwu ni, cakke kombeddi wubineno Wod pa dano ka obedo piny i kabedo me deyo ka ŋet Won Twer tuŋ lacuc, kun bino ki pol me polo.” 	“But I say to all of you: From now on you will see the Son of Man sitting at the right hand of the Mighty One and coming on the clouds of heaven.”
Lalaikmaa mo matek otugi kwanyo gweŋ mo madit ma rom ki kidi rego, ci obolo woko i nam, kun wacci, “Babilon ma en gaŋ madit-ti gibitimo ki tim bwami gicanyo woko matek i ŋom, pe doŋ gibinoŋo matwal! 	Then a mighty angel picked up a boulder the size of a large millstone and threw it into the sea, and said: “With such violence the great city of Babylon will be thrown down, never to be found again.
Yecu owacce ni, “Pe tye dano mo ma mako kweri dyaŋ, ka dok neno ŋeye, ma biromo bedo i ker pa Lubaŋa.”	Jesus replied, “No one who puts a hand to the plow and looks back is fit for service in the kingdom of God.”
Ka nene pe icato, kono pe obedo meri giri? Dok ka doŋ icato, pe onoŋo tye giri i te twerri? Piŋo itamo lok macalo meno i cwinyi? Pe ibwolo dano ento ibwolo Lubaŋa giri.” 	Didn’t it belong to you before it was sold? And after it was sold, wasn’t the money at your disposal? What made you think of doing such a thing? You have not lied just to human beings but to God.”
pil wii lobo meeri me timmo gin maber me deyo ka itye woko 	give respect and honour to your country when you are outside it by doing good things and behaving well
banno tyengi ka gitye ka legga i kanica 	folding their legs when in the church praying
lunyodo gubinno ka nenno tukko pa litinogi i cukul 	the parents came to school to see the games played by their children
ticce tekke tye i diyo cwiny, yubbe me rii kec pi cawa malac ma nonggo pud itye ka tiyone ma pe itwerro wekkone ma pe otum, ki wii me wil woko pi nino me yweyo ma ditto 	the difficulty of the work is determination, be prepared to work for long hours without food because you cannot live it without finishing and to forget about public holidays
tyel me ot man tye kwene? 	where is the support for the house? 
Ka Cwiny me ada bibino, en bitelowu i ada ducu	“I have much more to say to you, more than you can now bear.
wek niyewu pe ocuŋ i kom ryeko pa dano, ento i kom tek pa Lubaŋa. 	so that your faith might not rest on human wisdom, but on God’s power.
Onoŋo yam gibedo ka pwonye yo pa Rwot, ma lok okur i cwinye, kun pwonyo lok i kom Yecu atir mupye, kun kono ŋeyo lok me batija pa Jon keken. 	He had been instructed in the way of the Lord, and he spoke with great fervor and taught about Jesus accurately, though he knew only the baptism of John.
pam lakke otwii arii ci omiyo tye ka yelle ki arem 	his molar tooth grew out across and that is why it is-troubling him with pain, toothache
lacado nyeyo yo dogola kene	he who has diarrhoea knows the direction of the door without being told
ogerro ot onyuny mo en aye beddo lye 	he built a small house in which he is living
ento kit macalo yam lok ducu ma wabedo ka Tito botwu obedo lok me ada, kit meno wakkewa bene i nyim Tito obedo me ada. 	I had boasted to him about you, and you have not embarrassed me
I kare ma en owinyo ogamo ni, “Jo ma komgi yot pe gimito daktar, ento kono jo ma komgi lit aye. 	When the Pharisees saw this, they asked his disciples, “Why does your teacher eat with tax collectors and sinners?”
wacammo lamuno-muno pien ononggo mac otoo woko  	we ate in darkness because the light 
Kombeddi doŋ giketo latoŋ woko i lwit yadi, yat acel acel ma pe nyak nyige mabeco, gitoŋo gireto woko piny, ci gibolo woko i mac. 	And do not think you can say to yourselves, ‘We have Abraham as our father.’ I tell you that out of these stones God can raise up children for Abraham.
Bot jo muye Lubaŋa ma gitye i Korint, ma gin jo ma gilonyo gudoko maleŋ i Kricito Yecu, ma Lubaŋa olwoŋogi me bedo jone kikome, kacel ki jo ducu ma gitye i kabedo ducu, ma gilwoŋo nyiŋ Rwotwa Yecu Kricito, Rwotgi ki mewa bene: 	To the church of God in Corinth, to those sanctified in Christ Jesus and called to be his holy people, together with all those everywhere who call on the name of our Lord Jesus Christ—their Lord and ours:
guaa i kaka me Patiko	they are the descendants of the Patiko clan
Dok bene gimito ni dano omotgi wa i cuk-gu, gimaro bene ni dano myero gulwoŋgi ni, ‘Lapwony.’ 	they love the place of honor at banquets and the most important seats in the synagogues;
ibedo kany lataya ce? 	are you staying here forever? 
pe ilwor, cwinynyi myero pe obed ka ryangge 	don't be afraid and frightened 
“Lobo Jabulon ki lobo Naputali, yo tuŋ i nam, loka Jordan, Galilaya pa Lurok. 	“Land of Zebulun and land of Naphtali, the Way of the Sea, beyond the Jordan, Galilee of the Gentiles—
I kom nino mukwoŋo me cabit, ka wacokke ka baro mugati, Paulo obedo ka lok kwedgi pien onoŋo mito wot woko odiko	On the first day of the week we came together to break bread
Ka cen maraco gunene, ci guryebbe i nyime, gukok kun giwaco ni, “In giri Wod pa Lubaŋa.” 	Whenever the impure spirits saw him, they fell down before him and cried out, “You are the Son of God.”
Tye ŋat mo ma goro ma kun an pe agoro? Tye ŋat mo ma gimiyo opoto i bal ma cwinya pe owaŋ pire? 	Besides everything else, I face daily the pressure of my concern for all the churches.
Ka oloko pi gicikke manyen, en tamo pi gicikke mukwoŋo ca macalo gin ma karene okato woko. Gin ma karene doŋ okato, ma oti woko bene, noŋo doŋ cok rwenyo.	By calling this covenant “new,” he has made the first one obsolete; and what is obsolete and outdated will soon disappear.
bura woto ni Iwe Iwe 	the cat walks noiselessly 
jal man dong orukko ramtol ma ding mada ma makko tyenne amaka 	the fellow has put on small pair of trousers which is very tight on his legs
Ento kema me aryo ajwaka madit keken aye donyo iye kene, dok bene donyo iye kicel keken i mwaka acel acel, kun pe cito kunnu laboŋo remo, ma en tero me atyera pi balle ki pi bal pa lwak. 	But only the high priest entered the inner room, and that only once a year, and never without blood, which he offered for himself and for the sins the people had committed in ignorance.
parro mada gin angoo ma myero etim	meditates very much as to what he should do
cib i nyim luditto 	place it before the elders
gin ducu bene gumato ginamata acel me cwiny. Pien gumato pii mua ki i kom got me cwiny ma woto kacel kwedgi, got meno yam en Kricito. 	and drank the same spiritual drink; for they drank from the spiritual rock that accompanied them, and that rock was Christ.
roc tee lokki me dot i kot ma oling iye kunno 	reopen your case which is still in the court 
Ento pe gin ducu yam guye lok me kwena maber	And how can anyone preach unless they are sent? As it is written: “How beautiful are the feet of those who bring good news!”
jwil wanggi tek mada pe gimokko atata i owic ma gicikko pi gi 	quails are very cunning,they do not get caught easily in a trap laid up for them 
tyen ma okwot waar pe rukke iye 	shoes cannot be worn on a swollen foot
Waŋgi yenyo mon ma myero gitim kwedgi abor, pe giywe ki yenyo yo me timo bal. Giciko owic me mako jo ma cwinygi wirre atata. Cwinygi doŋ opwonnye woko i yo me woro me lim. Gin doŋ jo ma giceno! 	With eyes full of adultery, they never stop sinning; they seduce the unstable; they are experts in greed—an accursed brood!
kel labac me jwayo i luduku 	bring the cleaning rod for cleaning the guns 
atii moo manok kiek? 	may I pour or put a little oil in the food?
pe ber wii latin me teng woko i kom wonne 	it is not good for the child to be disobedient to his father
Pien kit macalo Yona yam otyeko nino adek, dyeceŋ ki dyewor, i i rec, kit meno Wod pa dano bene bityeko nino adek, dyeceŋ ki dyewor i cwiny lobo. 	He answered, “A wicked and adulterous generation asks for a sign! But none will be given it except the sign of the prophet Jonah.
man pe gin maber ma itiyo 	this is not the right thing that you did
acuurre ni pe otam ni en aye ma eryek en keken	I told him frankly that he shoud not think that he is the only one who is wise 
ngwec komme coo mada	his body smells very badly
mucuggwa ma tye malo caa bene twerro pwonne 	the oranges which are up there also can be plucked
kal matye i koloni twerro larre ka gijubbo oyot oyot ma nonggo kot Dud peya omollo 	the millet in the papyrus mat can be saved if it is removed quickly before it is swept away by the rain
litino gimarro gki mada 	children like very much to be tickled
i kare macon jami ducu ononggo gitiyo ki mola makwar 	in the past all musical instruments were made of brass 
pi meno lobo kwerowu. 	As it is, you do not belong to the world, but I have chosen you out of the world
Dok owaco ni, “Wod pa dano myerone okany can madwoŋ, dok ludoŋo ki ajwagi madito pa Lubaŋa ki lupwony-cik myero gukwere woko, ci guneke, ento myero gicere woko i nino me adekke.” 	And he said, “The Son of Man must suffer many things and be rejected by the elders, the chief priests and the teachers of the law, and he must be killed and on the third day be raised to life.”
twoo dyang agoli rac mada pien ballo kom dyang woko 	the skin disease of the cow is very bad because it destroys the skins of the cow agul? 
Atito botwu ni, wumak lurem pi tic ki lim ma pe atir, wek ka bitum, gijolwu i kabedo ma bedo matwal. 	For the people of this world are more shrewd in dealing with their own kind than are the people of the light.
Ento Lubaŋa olaro Lot, dano ma kite atir, ma yam cwinye ocwer twatwal pi tim kwele pa jo maraco. 	and if he rescued Lot, a righteous man, who was distressed by the depraved conduct of the lawless
mitto gibed ka gaddo mwodo ne kare ki kare nonno pud gicenggo ci girii nakanaka ma pe gitoo woko 	it is required to be cut from time to time when it is still short, then it will last long
Lok ma dok i kom keto cwiny, yam alwenyo i kom lwak jo muye Yecu marac. Dok lok ma dok i kom bedo ki kit atir ma cuŋ i lubo cik, onoŋo gire lok mo pe i koma. 	circumcised on the eighth day, of the people of Israel, of the tribe of Benjamin, a Hebrew of Hebrews; in regard to the law, a Pharisee;
kella moo lajwa mola  	the wizard, sometimes, smears himself with ash at night
ci openyogi ni, ‘Piŋo wucuŋ kany dyeceŋ jwi laboŋo tiyo gin mo?’ 	He asked them, ‘Why have you been standing here all day long doing nothing?’
gucitto ka pwonno ocunga i pap got 	they went to pick ocunga from the side of the mountain
lacooni tye mere ka pongge nono ni komme lit kun kono komme yot woko liweng, dag tic mitto mere citto ka nenno odilo 	the man is pretending that he is ill yet he is quite healthy, he does not want to work, he wants to go to watch the football 
kac pa pino kec mada 	the sting of the hornet is very painful
Ka dok aneno gin mo ma nen calo nam me kiyo maleŋ ma orubbe ki mac	And I saw what looked like a sea of glass glowing with fire and, standing beside the sea, those who had been victorious over the beast and its image and over the number of its name
Butte oyonne 	her neck is thin and long 
Ento ladit mony oketo cwinye i lok pa ladit ma loyo mel ki lok pa won mel, makato lok ma Paulo owaco. 	But the centurion, instead of listening to what Paul said, followed the advice of the pilot and of the owner of the ship.
ladit kanica rukko lagal ka citto ka legga ki dano 	a priest wears the white colour cloth on his neck when going to pray with the people
Kit meno bene Yecu yam oto cen woko i ŋe dogcel, wek omi elony dano ki remone kikome gubed maleŋ. 	And so Jesus also suffered outside the city gate to make the people holy through his own blood.
cee layab ma aebolli eno 	by slip of my tongue it made me say bad words
gibitammo pi itto malo i rwom me ticce i mwaka ma binno 	he will be considered for promotion in his work next year
tyen litino pe tur woko nikup nyo nitap ento nyoc anyocca 	the children's legs do not break completely but only bend, that is a green-stick fracture
gicammo dok gitiyo kwedde me wirro ki kom 	the shea butter oil is eaten and it is also used for smearing the body
latin nyanne caar Ova i a wotto atanya i nyim dano 	the girl is loose or has a bad habit, she walks indecently before the people
ka pe dong itti otuc ci ibinenno 	if you don't listen you will see
luditto maca pud peya gudok pacogi 	those elders have not yet gone back to their homes 
jukko pul me amwodda 	taking some groundnuts with the hands for eating
Lacere opotto ci opwacco congge 	Lacere fell and got his knee abraded or lacerated
otigo telle ni lyaa lyaa 	okra sauce is viscus it stretches into long threads when being eaten
wod pa Melki, wod pa Addi, wod pa Kocam, wod pa Elmadam, wod pa Er, 	the son of Melki, the son of Addi, the son of Cosam, the son of Elmadam, the son of Er,
wod pa Aminadab, wod pa Admin, wod pa Arni, wod pa Kejeron, wod pa Perej, wod pa Juda, 	the son of Amminadab, the son of Ram, the son of Hezron, the son of Perez, the son of Judah,
kongone twero bile manok wek wangee kit mitte maber 	a little of the beer can be tasted so that we can appreciate how nice it is
twoo ma lokko wang nen calo binjali 	yellow fever and jaundice of other causes
Obino i Najaret ka ma yam odoŋo iye, odonyo i kacokke i ceŋ cabit, kit macalo kite onoŋo tye. 	He went to Nazareth, where he had been brought up, and on the Sabbath day he went into the synagogue, as was his custom
ento ka guo i kom Yecu, guneno ni doŋ otyeko to woko, ci pe dok guturo tyene. 	When he had received the drink, Jesus said, “It is finished.” With that, he bowed his head and gave up his spirit.
jalle tye ki gubu mada nen tinggo guniya kado en kene 	the man has great strength look how he can take the gunny sack of salt alone
Gin aŋo doŋ ma myero watim? Pien gin gibiwinyo ni ibino. 	What shall we do? They will certainly hear that you have come,
nyok dyel tye ka tigu min dyel 	the he-goat is having coition with the she-goat or the he-goat is mounting a she-goat
ocitto woko 	he went out 
kit meno laco bene pe loyo kome kene ento dakone bene ma loyo. 	In the same way, the husband does not have authority over his own body but yields it to his wife.
terro ngati mo i makatap ka pido 	taking one to court for a case
Gimiyo wigi wil woko akaka i lok man ni, polo yam onoŋo obedo tye con, ki lobo bene ma giketo ki pii mua ki i pii, pi lok ma lubaŋa oloko. 	But they deliberately forget that long ago by God’s word the heavens came into being and the earth was formed out of water and by water.
danone ladwalle twatwal omiyo laworo waoo lacen ka legga pi dwalle ne 	that man is a person who always comes late and that made us come late to prayer 
ladit oo i kom caa ki kome ni tak 	the big man arrived precisely at the exact time
Ento ka luditone guneno ni gen me noŋo lim doŋ oa woko, gumako Paulo ki Cira guywayogi guterogi wa i cuk i nyim luloc, 	When her owners realized that their hope of making money was gone, they seized Paul and Silas and dragged them into the marketplace to face the authorities.
Mumiyo dano guuro matek, kun giwacci, “Man dok kit dano aŋo ma yamo ki nam giwinye-ni?” 	He replied, “You of little faith, why are you so afraid?” Then he got up and rebuked the winds and the waves, and it was completely calm.
Pien yam gicoyo ni, “Bed ki yomcwiny, in dako ma lalur ma yam pe inywalo latin mo-ni, mwoc ki wer kun idaŋŋe matek, in dako ma pud peya yam arem ogoyi! Pien litino pa dako ma gitenyo pol, kato litino pa dako ma bedo gin ki cware kacel.” 	But the Jerusalem that is above is free, and she is our mother.
pimmo lee ki luduku	aiming at the animal with the gun
obinno tin 	he came today 
Dako ma ineno ca en aye gaŋ madit ma tye ka loyo luker ducu me wi lobo.”	The woman you saw is the great city that rules over the kings of the earth.”
Tye bene gin mukene mapol ma Yecu otiyo	We know that his testimony is true.
bongone obedo olik olik 	the cloth is of partial dark brownish grey colour
dok bene wanoŋo gin mo keken ma walege pire, pien wagwoko cikke dok watiyo gin ma yomo cwinye. 	and receive from him anything we ask, because we keep his commands and do what pleases him.
ka lacen wan jo makwo, ma wadoŋ gibigwarowa kacel kwedgi i pol, wek warwatte ki Rwot i dye yamo	After that, we who are still alive and are left will be caught up together with them in the clouds to meet the Lord in the air
gigolo kop oloye 	he was convicted, or he was found guilty
dano mapol mada ma gimaarro borre 	there are very many people who like to be praised 
man dong dwe me adek	this is now the third month
litino aboro gin aye gukatto peny	only eight children passed the examination
rub cam ma icammo acamma wek omiini kwoo maber 	mix the types of food you eat to give you good life 
Olor kwedgi piny, ci ocuŋ ka ma olanne. 	He went down with them and stood on a level place
in labod wii mon pa dano 	you are a man who entices other people's women
kwidi me twoo man twerro nenne ki darabin keken 	the germs of this disease can only be seen through a microscope 
Ento Yecu odok iye ni, “Yam gicoyo ni, ‘Dano pe bibedo kwo ki kwon keken.’ ” 	Jesus answered, “It is written: ‘Man shall not live on bread alone.’”
Maro Petero onoŋo tye ki two lyeto, obuto piny, ci cutcut gutito pire bot Yecu.	Simon’s mother-in-law was in bed with a fever, and they immediately told Jesus about her.
ka oballo gin mo ci gitwerro pwodde	if he has spoilt anything, he can be beaten 
nyut kit yoo me nonggo jami meno 	indicate the way in which to find out such things
in kitti rac 	you have bad behaviour
Awoto obeddo ka berro lok kwica, wiye owil woko i kom dek matye i agulu, ma oketto i wii mac tye ka cek  opoo lacen ononggo dek dong owang woko 	Awoto went on talking too much and forgot that she had put on fire a pot for cooking the food, when she suddenly remembered, she went and found that the food has already been burnt
pe ber me rony	it is not good making fun
en tye ki ryeko mada me yubbo caa 	he is very skilful in repairing watches
lok ducu tyekke diki 	all the matters will be finished tomorrow
pe ngeyo jwac 	does not know good polishing
Ka doŋ owaco lok man, ci odaŋŋe ki dwan madit ni, “Lajaro, katti woko!” 	I knew that you always hear me, but I said this for the benefit of the people standing here, that they may believe that you sent me.”
tong jang yaddi maca ma ojany oummo yooni woko 	cut all the branches of the trees which have grown and covered the road
latel wii gabument twerro beddo precident	the head of the government can be president
Dok bene pe ikwoŋ kwoŋ ki wii, pien in pe itwero loko yer wii mo acel doko matar nyo macol. 	And do not swear by your head, for you cannot make even one hair white or black.
Yat maber pe twero nyako nyige maraco, ki yat marac bene pe twero nyako nyige mabeco. 	Likewise, every good tree bears good fruit, but a bad tree bears bad fruit.
Yecu ocako lwoŋogi bote, ci owaco botgi ni, “Wun wuŋeyo ni, jo ma gilwoŋogi ni gin lulo Lurok giloyo dano ki tek, dok luditogi bene gibedo ki twero i komgi. 	Jesus called them together and said, “You know that those who are regarded as rulers of the Gentiles lord it over them, and their high officials exercise authority over them.
Owaco botgi ni, “Con gibatijawu ki kit batija aŋo?” Gugamo ni, “Ki batija pa Jon.” 	So Paul asked, “Then what baptism did you receive?” “John’s baptism,” they replied.
ketto giggi i kom gatti pi jami ma en tye kwedde pe konynyo 	to have a grudge against a person because of the things that he has, does not help 
Ka apo pig wa?i, miyo i dyece? ki dyewor aparo me neni, wek apo? ki yomcwiny. 	I thank God, whom I serve, as my ancestors did, with a clear conscience, as night and day I constantly remember you in my prayers.
rutto it 	piercing the ear
kit ma wabibedo kwede peya onen, ento waŋeyo ni ka en binen, wan bene wabinen calo en, pien wabinene kit ma en tye kwede. 	But we know that when Christ appears, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is.
Ka Marita owinyo ni Yecu oebino, en ocito, oromo kwede, ento Maliam odoŋ, obedo i ot. 	and many Jews had come to Martha and Mary to comfort them in the loss of their brother.
pimmo lee ki luduko me acella	to aim at animals with the gun for shooting
bed ki tengge 	sit away or stay away or keep away 
nyutta lok acel me lok muno (kiggereja) 	show me one English word
Ka inen mwak alip acel doŋ otum, ci gibigonyo Catan woko ki i mabucce. 	When the thousand years are over, Satan will be released from his prison
latin nyakone pyerre yom ginynyo myel mada 	the girl has aflexible waist, she dances very well
joo ma gukwogo monynyo Poland gin aye Jeremel 	the Germans were the first people to attack Poland 
gidonggo matek mada ma wangge ducu dong obboke woko 	he was boxed so much that his eyes were all red
wer myel  	songs for dancing
Ento ajwaka madit oa kacel ki jo ma gitye kwede, ma gin aye dul pa Lucadukayo, ma nyeko omakogi matek, 	Then the high priest and all his associates, who were members of the party of the Sadducees, were filled with jealousy.
Ento dwan odok iye ki i polo ni, ‘Gin ma Lubaŋa olonyo in pe ilwoŋ ni obedo me kwer.’ 	“The voice spoke from heaven a second time, ‘Do not call anything impure that God has made clean.’
I lobo pa muni boma acel acel tye ki limu ento botwa kany pe 	in Europe every town has a cemetery but for us here there is none
Lubaŋa Wonwa kikome, ki Rwotwa Yecu Kricito, myero omi wanoŋ yo me bino botwu. 	Now may our God and Father himself and our Lord Jesus clear the way for us to come to you.
wayo dong ki gin mamit 	eating either sweetened or nice sour taste thing to bring appetite to a sick person
Ot Cokke Madit	A Big Assembly Parliament 
twoone pe cang 	his disease does not cure or heal 
Ento ka guneno laco ma gicaŋo-ni ocuŋ ka ŋetgi, lok mo ma myero guwac doŋ obedo pe. 	But since they could see the man who had been healed standing there with them, there was nothing they could say.
ento lupwonnyene gutiŋe ki aduku i dyewor, ci gucwale piny ki i wi cel. 	But his followers took him by night and lowered him in a basket through an opening in the wall.
Cik ca-ni kikome onoŋo myero okel kwo, ento dok okelo to bota. 	Once I was alive apart from the law; but when the commandment came, sin sprang to life and I died.
Ci oa odok paco. 	But I want you to know that the Son of Man has authority on earth to forgive sins.” So he said to the paralyzed man, “Get up, take your mat and go home.”
ka doŋ otyeko, ci ŋat acel i kin lupwonnyene owacce ni, “Rwot, pwonywa ki lega, kit macalo yam Jon opwonyo lupwonnyene.” 	When he finished, one of his disciples said to him, “Lord, teach us to pray, just as John taught his disciples.”
cam meeri pat pien en pe cammo cam ma in icammoni 	his food is different because he does not eat the same food as you
Utmega, amito wuŋe ni, lok mutimme i koma okonyo matek me nyayo lok me kwena maber. 	filled with the fruit of righteousness that comes through Jesus Christ—to the glory and praise of God.
Cwal lwak gucit i kin paco ki i gaŋi ma cokcok, guwil ginacama pigi kengi.” 	Send the people away so that they can go to the surrounding countryside and villages and buy themselves something to eat.”
Gin mumiyo aloko kit meno, pien wacuŋ matek i kom Lubaŋa pi Kricito. 	You yourselves are our letter, written on our hearts, known and read by everyone.
bedo kacel miyo okolok lak iteri	if you sit in one position for too long, a centipede will crawl into your bottom
Ento lok ma dok i kom kare, ki nino, utmegiwa, pe myero aco pire botwu, 	Now, brothers and sisters, about times and dates we do not need to write to you,
wek gupenye ni, “In aye ŋat ma myero obin-ni, nyo dok wakur ŋat mukene?” 	to ask him, “Are you the one who is to come, or should we expect someone else?”
jape ka imiine kare ci lokko ma pe gik 	if you give time to the fellow he will talk non stop 
lwak lulonyo gubolo iye mapol. 	Many rich people threw in large amounts.
lyec guwok kany ci gunyonno kal woko 	the elephants passed through here and treaded down the millet in the field 
Yecu odok iye ni, “Elia aye myero okwoŋ bino, ka wek ocak dwoko jami ducu kakare. 	The disciples asked him, “Why then do the teachers of the law say that Elijah must come first?”
en aye twoo bene ma geggo coo lac, pien tweyo yoo lac woko, ci lac dong peg i ologo 	it is a disease which prevents a person from passing urine, because it shuts the urinary tract, through which the urine passes, causing a condition known as retention of urine
Jo ma onoŋo tye i dog cam gucako lok i kingi kekengi ni, “Man aŋa, ma weko bal-li?” 	The other guests began to say among themselves, “Who is this who even forgives sins?”
Lok me kwena maber onoŋo yam Lubaŋa ociko pire con i lok ma lunebi yam gutito, dok bene onoŋo gicoyo woko i ginacoya maleŋ. 	Paul, a servant of Christ Jesus, called to be an apostle and set apart for the gospel of God—
Askari gutero Yecu wa i ot pa kabaka, ma gilwoŋo Praitorion, ci gulwoŋo buca monygi ducu gucokke kacel. 	The soldiers led Jesus away into the palace (that is, the Praetorium) and called together the whole company of soldiers.
ngaa mukene bene matye ka pwony? 	who else is also teaching? 
lammo dano marac  	cursing the people or wishing bad omen
pirro lok i kom dano pe ber 	plotting against the people is not good 
cul banyani  	pay your debt
cabun tye ma patpat macallo me Iwokko agulo, wiic ki me lwokko kom 	there are many types ot soap such as for utensils, hair and for bodies
Laditte opwoyo lagwok-jami ma pe lagen, pien otiyo ki ryeko	I know what I’ll do so that, when I lose my job here, people will welcome me into their houses.’
pien bedo ber ka dul komi mo acel orwenyo, kato ma kono gibolo komi woko kulu i Geena. 	It is better for you to lose one part of your body than for your whole body to be thrown into hell.
Yeko te lok macalo meno oloya, mumiyo apenye ka en mito cito i Jerucalem wek giciŋol lokke ki kunnu. 	I was at a loss how to investigate such matters; so I asked if he would be willing to go to Jerusalem and stand trial there on these charges.
en lanyekko mada pe mitti ngati mo obed ki jami ma loyo meere 	he is very jealous, he does not want other people to be with things more than his
Pi meno doŋ, utmegina, ka wucokke ka camo cam pa Rwotwa, ŋat acel acel myero koŋ okur lawote. 	So then, my brothers and sisters, when you gather to eat, you should all eat together.
jo mukene giwacci gitye ki twer me bil ento gitemmo ci pe timme 	some people say that they have the power of hypnotism but they try to do so and fail
Lok ma wuloko myero obed lok mamit ma kado oromo maber, wek omi wuŋe kit ma myero wudok kwede i peny pa ŋat acel acel. 	Be wise in the way you act toward outsiders; make the most of every opportunity.
Pi meno, wubed ma waŋwu twolo, pien pe wuŋeyo nino ma Rwotwu bibino iye. 	“Therefore keep watch, because you do not know on what day your Lord will come.
Gugamo, ni, “Ye wek ŋat acel obed i kom badi tuŋ lacuc ki acel bene obed i kom badi tuŋ lacam i kare me deyoni.” 	They replied, “Let one of us sit at your right and the other at your left in your glory.”
Pien macalo lutkot wil, ci menyo but lobo tuŋcel nio tuŋcel, Wod pa dano bene bibedo kit meno i ninone. 	For the Son of Man in his day will be like the lightning, which flashes and lights up the sky from one end to the other.
ento ka doŋ giketo deyo i kom Yecu, ci gupo ni ceŋ gicoyo lok magi i kome, dok ni gitimo i kome. 	At first his disciples did not understand all this
meddo dek manok wek ecam 	to add a little more food so that he may eat it
mayo jami pa dano?  	robbing the people ot their property
tye twonne mo madit mada i kom twonni ma okello 	there is a very big bull among the bulls which he brought
acokko jamini mapol aterro gang ci pe imiya iye bakacic mo? 	I collected many of your things and I took them home
in pe ingeyo pokko dano ki aryo aryo? 	don't you know how to divide people into twos? 
yatte gawo mada  	the tree is very brittle, easily breakable
Ka askari gutyeko guro Yecu i kom yatariya, gukwanyo ginarukane, gupoko i dul aŋwen, dul acel pi askari acel acel	Pilate answered, “What I have written, I have written.”
Obal lawot mada, meno aye dano ma itwerro citto kwede ka dwar 	Obal is a great walker, he is the one with whom you can go to hunt
lapeena ne dong otwoo twerro gakke maber 	the pigeon peas are now dry, they can be coarsely ground
lapok cinger guna	the distributor's hand is baggy
pud ocitto ka gwekko ringo ki dano 	he has just gone to cut the meat for the people
Pien ŋat ma oto, balle doŋ gik woko. 	For we know that our old self was crucified with him so that the body ruled by sin might be done away with, that we should no longer be slaves to sin—
gin aye kono myero gubed kany i nyimi gukel adotgi, ka gitye ki lok mo i koma. 	But there are some Jews from the province of Asia, who ought to be here before you and bring charges if they have anything against me.
pien yam bene gicoyo ni, ‘En biciko lumalaikane piri, wek gugwoki,’ 	For it is written: “‘He will command his angels concerning you to guard you carefully;
juk latin pe obed ka timme atata 	restrain the child from misbehaving himself
mitto uci me kwoyo bongone ma oyec 	wants thread for sewing or mending her torn clothes
enni lanieer agaa? 	whose sister is this? 
jullo genggi nonggo lutic me binno ka tic botti	ill temper prevents you from getting people to come to work for you
tye bot Okot 	he is with Okot
“Cwinya koni oŋabbe aŋaba. Abiwaco lok aŋo? Abana, lara i kom cawa man? Ento pi lok man omiyo ao i kom cawa-ni. 	But if it dies, it produces many seeds.
en ada cako nyako nyig dok cek, mukene miya acel, ki mukene pyerabicel, ki mukene pyeradek.” 	This is the one who produces a crop, yielding a hundred, sixty or thirty times what was sown.”
latin pudi teyo ateya 	the baby is still walking unsteadily 
geerre oryammo dano woko ki dong tic 	his cruelty has chased away the people from work
Pien ka ce won agit jabu oruko boŋŋi mabeco obino kwede i cokkewu, ki lacan bene oruko boŋŋi mucido, 	Suppose a man comes into your meeting wearing a gold ring and fine clothes, and a poor man in filthy old clothes also comes in.
pok kin Joe ma gitye ka lweny 	separate the people who are fighting
dano ducu guotte lumuku ka yobbo dye boma 	all the people, workers, masters women and men alike gathered to clean the township
ento pe gitye ki lwitgi i igi, giri pi kare manok	But since they have no root, they last only a short time
agara tong ma pek mitto dano ma ocwiny en aye otii kwedde	agara is a heavy spear which requires a strong person to use it
tyerro atabo dek ki lwak	offering before the people dishes to eat
ceng doggola woko 	the way to go to America is about to close
cogi oluma keken gin aye ma gudonyo i ot 	very important people only who entered the house
Ŋene gire maber ni, Rwotwa yam oa ki i kin likwayo pa Juda, dok Moses yam pe oloko lok mo i kom kaka meno ma mako ajwagi. 	For it is clear that our Lord descended from Judah, and in regard to that tribe Moses said nothing about priests.
Pi deyo ki ditte en omiyowa cikke madoŋo twatwal ki me wel madwoŋ, wek ka walimo, wabwot woko ki i balle me kit pa dano ma tye i lobo pi miti marac, ka wek doŋ waribbe i kit pa Lubaŋa. 	Through these he has given us his very great and precious promises, so that through them you may participate in the divine nature, having escaped the corruption in the world caused by evil desires.
Pe iye lok adot mo ma gikelo i kom ladit mo, gwok nyo ka tye lucaden aryo nyo adek macalo ginacoya owaco. 	For Scripture says, “Do not muzzle an ox while it is treading out the grain,” and “The worker deserves his wages.”
man aye twoo ma onynyo gurre kacel ma olugge i kern nyo i wic ma yil mada, maarro makko litino ma katto ducu 	it is a disease which comes like small pimples which affects the skin forming round areas on the body and head and very itchy, it affects the children very frequently
mur pii malyet ka iwek okwee ka dong ilur me amatta 	boil the water, and allow it to cool, and then filter it for drinking 
ribbo dano aryo ma yang ononggo gidagge wek gumaare	reconciling two people who used to hate each other to become friendly
nywanno lok woko ki i kot 	to mix up evidence in court 
cog latin ogwet laworo ka gweyo odilo  	the child's knee was dislocated yesterday while playing football
rwacco gwok matek twatwal i Dom pe ber	to fling the dog down violently is not good 
Kumeno ŋat munyomo nyako ma ecikke kwede noŋo otimo ber, ento ŋat ma pe onyomo nyako ma en ocikke kwede noŋo otimo ber makato. 	So then, he who marries the virgin does right, but he who does not marry her does better.
Wun pe wuye, pien pe wutye i kin romina. 	The Jews who were there gathered around him, saying, “How long will you keep us in suspense? If you are the Messiah, tell us plainly.”
I kare mo Paulo owaco ki Barnaba ni, “Bin wek wadok ka limo utmego ma i gaŋ ducu ma yam watuco iye lok pa Rwot, wanen kit ma gitye kwede.” 	Some time later Paul said to Barnabas, “Let us go back and visit the believers in all the towns where we preached the word of the Lord and see how they are doing.”
gicakko nyig latin tin i kanica 	the child has been baptised today in the church 
twoo ne cudu wii dano acuda 	the disease causes swellings over the head 
Moses man aye ceŋ otitc bot jo Icrael ni, ‘Lubaŋa bicwalo lanebi piwu ma bia ki i kin utmegiwu macalo ocwalo an-ni.’ 	“This is the Moses who told the Israelites, ‘God will raise up for you a prophet like me from your own people.’
Kerode ki Pilato gudoko lurem i nino meno cut, pien yam con onoŋo gimon kekengi. 	That day Herod and Pilate became friends—before this they had been enemies.
goyo matapwali 	making bricks 
wangge obeddo ni golo nolo 	his eyes are very large and big 
Ka ce dako mo muye Rwot tye ki wadine ma gin mon to, myero en omi botgi kony, wek pe giket peko i kom lwak muye Yecu, ento lwak muye Yecu gubed ka konyo mon ma coggi oto ma lakonygi mo pe. 	Some have in fact already turned away to follow Satan.
Lubaŋa omiwu tek ducu ma rwatte ki twero me deyone, wek wucir can ducu kun wudiyo cwinywu i yo ducu ki yomcwiny. 	so that you may live a life worthy of the Lord and please him in every way: bearing fruit in every good work, growing in the knowledge of God,
Owaco botgi ni, “Wod pa dano aye rwot me cabit.” 	Then Jesus said to them, “The Son of Man is Lord of the Sabbath.”
cep tye ka jwirro kal woko	the sun is withering the millet
ludito gucokke ka lammo gum ki awobe ma gucitto ka dwar, ni wek gudwar maber, gunek lee mapol, gin mo bene marac pe otimgi 	the elders gathered to bless the boys who were going to hunt, that they may hunt well, kill many animals and nothing to hurt them
Yecu en aye latin anywalla pa Lubaga pe giketto aketta callo dano 	Jesus is the begotten child of God, not created like man
Pien tam ma giketo i kit pa dano ki tuŋ bot Lubaŋa en kwor, pien pe winyo cik pa Lubaŋa, pe bene twero winyone. 	The mind governed by the flesh is death, but the mind governed by the Spirit is life and peace.
lok me robbo dog dano	a case for provoking the people
com pii i nyuka man ka wek obed maliyo me amatta 	add more water into this porridge to make it fluid enough for drinking 
cingge orwatte ki dano ka dwar 	he accidentally killed or wounded a man while hunting
gwek kom agwata man maber 	decorate this calabash bowl by making small cuts on it
Wan wakwaŋ waa ki i Pilipi ma nino madito me Mugati ma Tobi Pe Iye doŋ okato, ka wakwaŋ pi nino abic ci wao botgi i Teroa, watyeko kunnu nino abiro. 	But we sailed from Philippi after the Festival of Unleavened Bread, and five days later joined the others at Troas, where we stayed seven days.
poor bor pa yatte 	measure the length of the pole 
I kare me karama, yam mitte ni myero ogony botgi ŋat acel pigi.]” 	Now at the feast the governor was accustomed to releasing to the multitude one prisoner whom they wished.
Ci alokke me neno dwan ma onoŋo tye ka lok kweda-ni. 	I turned around to see the voice that was speaking to me
ogalle bot laremme 	he delayed at his friend's house
bongo ducu ma en rukko nino ducu gibecco mada 	all the clothes that she wears are always very beautiful 
man ngeyo cunna mada 	this one knows too much courtship  
Dano ducu onoŋo gitye ka koko kun gikumo pire	Meanwhile, all the people were wailing and mourning for her
ngab koti en i kom mucumar i kor ot 	hang this coat on the hook on the wall 
gwok litino ki kec 	prevent the children from hunger 
“Pe wuŋol kop i kom jo mukene, wek wun bene pe giŋol kop i komwu. 	No one could say a word in reply, and from that day on no one dared to ask him any more questions.
ijuddo pingoo? 	why are you sulky? 
ocitto ka nenno meeye  	he went to see his secret girlfriend 
“Kit meno awoto Damaciko kun atye ki twero ki cik ma ajwagi madito gumiya. 	“On one of these journeys I was going to Damascus with the authority and commission of the chief priests.
Ento Yecu odokkigi iye ni, “Wora tye ka tic nio koni, an bene atye tic.” 	So, because Jesus was doing these things on the Sabbath, the Jewish leaders began to persecute him.
locco ma kitmeno pe ber	that type governing is not good 
Koŋ wuwiny muŋ man, ni, pe wan ducu wabito, ento wan ducu gibilokowa woko, 	Listen, I tell you a mystery: We will not all sleep, but we will all be changed—
Ka owinyo ni meno aye Yecu me Najaret, ocako daŋŋe ni, “Yecu Lakwar Daudi, timma kica ba!” 	When he heard that it was Jesus of Nazareth, he began to shout, “Jesus, Son of David, have mercy on me!”
it pe kato wic	the ear is not bigger than its head
rwot onywakko yoo ki acikarine 	the chief was accompanied by his policeman 
Wumi pwoc i kit gin ducu, pien meno aye gin ma Lubaŋa mito ki botwu i Kricito Yecu. 	give thanks in all circumstances; for this is God’s will for you in Christ Jesus.
Wubed ki yomcwiny pi man, kadi bed kombeddi gwok nyo cwinywu twero cwer pi kare manoknok mo pi kit ma gitye ka omo ki cwinywu i yo mapatpat, 	who through faith are shielded by God’s power until the coming of the salvation that is ready to be revealed in the last time.
man dong lapaco pe citto kamo 	this is now a villager, he will not go anywhere
Wudiyo cwinywu kadi ka ŋat mo lokowu me doko opiine, nyo camo limwu, nyo buyowu, nyo um i komwu nyo kadi doŋo lemwu. 	You gladly put up with fools since you are so wise!
ki kanyine bene. Kanyine onoŋo pe gikwoyo akwoya, ento gicweyo acweya, cakke ki malo. 	When the soldiers crucified Jesus, they took his clothes, dividing them into four shares, one for each of them, with the undergarment remaining
Cutcut ludoŋo pyeraryo wiye aŋwen ma gibedo i wi komkergi i nyim Lubaŋa guryebbe piny guworo Lubaŋa, 	And the twenty-four elders, who were seated on their thrones before God, fell on their faces and worshiped God,
ento en owaccigi ni, “An ennu, gwok wulwor”, 	When they had rowed about three or four miles, they saw Jesus approaching the boat, walking on the water; and they were frightened.
ka omatto lemun ci cwinynye leny barro korre mada 	whenever he takes lemon, he feels severe heartburn 
opong agulo ni maga  	the pot is completely full
Owaŋo gaŋigi Codom ki Gomora woko ducu gudoko buru, kun oŋolo kop me tyekogi woko, ci omiyo gubedo lanen bot jo ma pe bilworo Lubaŋa i kare me anyim. 	if he condemned the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah by burning them to ashes, and made them an example of what is going to happen to the ungodly;
wek gubed ki gen me noŋo kwo ma pe tum. Lubaŋa ma pe loko lok goba yam ociko pire i acakki piny, 	Paul, a servant of God and an apostle of Jesus Christ to further the faith of God’s elect and their knowledge of the truth that leads to godliness—
Lwak gupenye ni, “Watim aŋo doŋ?” 	“What should we do then?” the crowd asked.
Doŋ cam matek tye pi jo muteggi, ma ryekogi ma gupwonnye kwede me poko gin maber ki gin marac doŋ ojiŋ pi ketone i tic.	But solid food is for the mature, who by constant use have trained themselves to distinguish good from evil.
jerro dano pe gin maber 	humiliating a person by telling him about his tribal status is not good 
luditto ma con yang gijwayo kom tonggi mapwot ki pot Comoro ma gwaa 	long time ago the old people used to polish the shaft of the spears to make them smooth with comoro's leaves 
Pilato dok okato woko botgi, owaco ki gin ni, “Nen, akelo en botwu, wek wuŋe ni pe anoŋo kop mo i kome.” 	and went up to him again and again, saying, “Hail, king of the Jews!” And they slapped him in the face.
orukko bongo ma komme ogoyo goyo 	he dressed in a cloth which has variegated colours
ree dong latin ki rangi makwar 	smear the child's lips with the red colour
komme pek   	she is heavy, and this means, she is pregnant
kel placita wek imwon ki wang ret ma i tyenne 	bring the plaster and cover the wound on his leg with it
mooro wange i kom dano mo 	being annoyed with someone
Ka Yecu odonyo i yeya, ci lupwonnyene gulube. 	But Jesus told him, “Follow me, and let the dead bury their own dead.”
ma gunen kun gitye ki deyo, guloko pi ane ki i lobo man, ma en myero ocob i Jerucalem. 	They spoke about his departure, which he was about to bring to fulfillment at Jerusalem.
Mene ma yot, me waco ni, ‘Balli doŋ giweko,’ nyo ni, ‘A, iwoti’? 	Jesus knew what they were thinking and asked, “Why are you thinking these things in your hearts?
tunggo dano ki lok twatwal 	talking too much and at frequent intervals
Yecu odokke iye ni, “Yam gicoyo ni, ‘Wor Rwot Lubaŋani, dok bene iti pire keken.’ ” 	Jesus answered, “It is written: ‘Worship the Lord your God and serve him only.’”
jullo genggi nonggo lutic me binno ka tic botti 	moodiness prevents you from getting people to come to work for you
ento ka doŋ gicero pe dok to. 	The body that is sown is perishable, it is raised imperishable;
Dok owaco ni, “Yam tye dano mo ma tye ki awobene aryo. 	Jesus continued: “There was a man who had two sons.
ka min latin pe cammo cam maber, dotto latin tek mada 	if the childs mother does not eat good food
jenynye ka lweny pe ber 	being furious and wanting to fight is not good
kella cukuleke wek aruk 	bring me the knickers or briefs so that I may wear it
Ci obedo i tim nino pyera ŋwen	and he was in the wilderness forty days, being tempted by Satan
ocoge rac pi cubbo tyen dano 	ocoge is bad for pricking the peoples feet
Wod pa dano dok obino kun camo cam kadi wa mato mat bene, meno bene guwacci, “Nen, dano ma laworo dok lamero bene, larem lujogmucoro ki lubalo! Ento ryeko pa Lubaŋa oloyo kop pi ticce ma en otiyo.” 	The Son of Man came eating and drinking, and they say, ‘Here is a glutton and a drunkard, a friend of tax collectors and sinners.’ But wisdom is proved right by her deeds.”
Ento oyotoyot Yecu oloko kwedgi kun waco ni, “Wudi cwinywu, an enni	Shortly before dawn Jesus went out to them, walking on the lake.
ci lutwo ducu ma gugudo gucaŋ.	They begged him to let them touch even the edge of his cloak, and all who touched it were healed.
en obeddo namba acel 	he was the first 
ryebbo lokke tek pien dong oo wa i kot 	it is difficult now to put the case to rest because it has already reached the court
Yam onoŋo Yecu tye ka pwony i kacokke mo i ceŋ cabit. 	On a Sabbath Jesus was teaching in one of the synagogues,
miyo litino me woo i kilaci pe ber	to let the children to shout in the class is not good 
Ento i kare ma Mikael, lamalaika madit, yam olwenyo ki Catan kun pyem kwede pi kom Moses, en yam pe oŋwette pi ŋolo kop mo me yet, ento oloko ni, “Rwot myero ojuki.” 	In the very same way, on the strength of their dreams these ungodly people pollute their own bodies, reject authority and heap abuse on celestial beings.
iye onat 	her abdomen is flat
motoka opotto i wii kulo ci jami ducu ma iwiye oo woko i pii 	the car overturned into the river and all the things on it fell into water
ryekogi doŋ oballe woko, niyegi pe tye kakare. 	Just as Jannes and Jambres opposed Moses, so also these teachers oppose the truth
komi gum woddi dong odokko meja 	you are very lucky your son has now become a major
pwaa winyo woko ki i poto kal 	stir or chase the birds away from the millet field
awobe ojwaar kany mabecco mada me tukko ngwec 	the boys here have grown tall and slim and very suitable for athletics
ento guwot kun giruko war tyengi, pe guwot ma gubamo kanyi aryo i komgi. 	Wear sandals but not an extra shirt.
I kare ma lanyom pud ogalle, gin ducu nino omako waŋgi, ci gunino woko. 	The bridegroom was a long time in coming, and they all became drowsy and fell asleep.
nyany lum wek kora yoo obed malac 	part the grass away by trampling on it to clear the way 
Wonne ogamo doge ni, ‘Latinna, in nino ducu itye kweda, jamina ducu meri. 	“‘My son,’ the father said, ‘you are always with me, and everything I have is yours.
Nio wa i kare man abedo ka limo kony ma a ki bot Lubaŋa	But God has helped me to this very day; so I stand here and testify to small and great alike
Pien i kare ma yam pud wagoro, ma kare doŋ oromo, Kricito oto pi dano ma pe gilworo Lubaŋa. 	And hope does not put us to shame, because God’s love has been poured out into our hearts through the Holy Spirit, who has been given to us.
joo ma giwotto labongo waar puny tyengi kak mada 	people who walk without wearing shoes, their heels do crack very much
panne dong apanna ki dano	he avoids the people
en lanyatte mada, pien en lalonyo 	he is very proud because he is rich
abakko anyeri ki dim kamama oyikke iye i tee lum	I stabbed the reed rat with the sharp end of the spear underneath the grass where it hid
En oloko lok magi i kare ma en pwonyo i kacokke i Kapernaum. 	Your ancestors ate manna and died, but whoever feeds on this bread will live forever.”
I lobo pa muni boma acel acel tye ki limu ento botwa kany pe 	in Europe every town has graveyards but for us here there is none
anyira gitye ka dinno belgi i wii pata 	the girls are threshing their millet on the flat rock
ogoyo wiye tung cel keken 	he struck only one side of his head 
gin ducu gibecco 	they are all very good 
pi Iworro me nekko kikopo ci omiyo komme dong myel li bag bag 	because of breaking the cup, fear made his whole body shake 
Ociko lwak ni gubed piny i ŋom, 	His disciples answered, “Where could we get enough bread in this remote place to feed such a crowd?”
ka pig dekke ocwiny woko ci med iye pii 	if the water in the sauce has dried out, add some more into it
Akelo tin opoor woko 	Akelo ran away to her boyfriend today
lwango pe kunu bur	flies never give up the ulcer
ka pyerri lit gungge piny tek 	it is very hard to bend down when you have backache
jullo lim 	being thrift, and watching over one's expenditure carefully
“I kare ma atye ka wot ma doŋ anyiko cok ki Damaciko, cwiny dyeceŋ, ci dero madit oa ki i polo, oryeny ocaro koma. 	“About noon as I came near Damascus, suddenly a bright light from heaven flashed around me.
Bal pa jo mogo nen woko ka maleŋ ma cimo atir ni kop biloyogi, ento bal pa jo mukene nen lacen. 	Stop drinking only water, and use a little wine because of your stomach and your frequent illnesses.
gam uno ene me tweyo dyel 	get the rope here for tying the goat
komme lit 	he is ill or sick 
Pien ka gitimo man ma yat pud dyak, bibedo niŋniŋ ka yat doŋ otwo?” 	For if people do these things when the tree is green, what will happen when it is dry?”
Pien dano ma mito laro kwone birwenyone arwenya, ento dano mo ma rwenyo kwone pira aye binoŋone. 	For whoever wants to save their life will lose it, but whoever loses their life for me will find it.
bel dong iye ka nyur 	the corn is germinating 
cwerro bao rucu rucu	to plan the board hurriedly, not very well
aa wunu woko ki kany	get out of here
jang yat man twerro Iwerre maber mada 	the branches of this tree can be very well pruned 
wod pa Matat, wod pa Levi, wod pa Melki, wod pa Janai, wod pa Yucepu, 	the son of Matthat, the son of Levi, the son of Melki, the son of Jannai, the son of Joseph,
jok owok i komme 	the spirit manifested itself through him
Ka wacoyo kodi me cwiny i kinwu, meno lokke bedo lok madit twatwal ka wakayo jami mogo me kom ki botwu? 	If we have sown spiritual seed among you, is it too much if we reap a material harvest from you?
pud tye ki tino omiyo lokko kumeno 	he is still childish that is why he speaks like that
Lukwaŋ guyenyo yo me lwi woko ki i mel, ento ka doŋ gucwalo yeya i nam kun gitimo macalo gimito bolo lajuk yo tuŋ nyime, 	In an attempt to escape from the ship, the sailors let the lifeboat down into the sea, pretending they were going to lower some anchors from the bow.
Yecu odok iye botgi ni, “Ka wulego, wuwac kit man ni, ‘Wonwa, giwor nyiŋi maleŋ. Ker meri obin. 	He said to them, “When you pray, say: “‘Father, hallowed be your name, your kingdom come.
Wubin bote, en got makwo ma yam dano gukwero, ento ki bot Lubaŋa obedo got me wel ma en oyero. 	now that you have tasted that the Lord is good.
oduu yaa mit mada ma dano gicammo ka nyigge dong giwekko me moone 	the pulp of the shea butternut is very sweet and people eat it and leave the seeds for shea butter oil
ka doŋ karene oromo ci onyuto woko ka maleŋ, i lokke ma gimiyo bota me atita pi cik pa Lubaŋa Lalarwa. 	in the hope of eternal life, which God, who does not lie, promised before the beginning of time,
yikko layata i buro malyet wek ocek iye	to bury a potato in a hot ash for roasting it
Wan warwako nyonyo i dog aguragura wek guwinywa, ci wawiro komgi ducu dok tuŋ ka ma wamito. 	When we put bits into the mouths of horses to make them obey us, we can turn the whole animal.
nyotto layata me nyubbo ki cak	mashes the potatoes for mixing with milk
adaane tye kwene	where is its truth? 
gin gimitto ngoo? 	what do they want?
Ka lukwena ma gitye i Jerucalem guwinyo ni Lucamaria guye lok pa Lubaŋa, ci gucwalo botgi Petero ki Jon. 	When the apostles in Jerusalem heard that Samaria had accepted the word of God, they sent Peter and John to Samaria.
kedo kom dako onyak ngom-ngore 	the woman's body is full of large tattoo or scarifying marks 
Kica pa Rwotwa Yecu Kricito obed kwedwu.	The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you.
Oa malo ki i dog cam, olunyo boŋŋine oketo teŋe, okwanyo taulo, otweyo i pyere. 	Jesus knew that the Father had put all things under his power, and that he had come from God and was returning to God;
Bot Tito, latinna me ada ma wanywako niye acel: Lubaŋa Wonwa ki Lalarwa Kricito Yecu omii kica ki kuc. 	and which now at his appointed season he has brought to light through the preaching entrusted to me by the command of God our Savior,
gitye ka um pi too pa rwot ni otoo ber 	they are very happy about the death of the chief, that it was right that he died 
Ka odonyo i ot, openyogi ni, “Piŋo wuwo ki koko? Latin man peya oto, ento onino anina.” 	He went in and said to them, “Why all this commotion and wailing? The child is not dead but asleep.”
Pe wuribbe i tic mo ducu me piny macol ma pe konyo, ento wunyut kit tic meno woko ka maleŋ. 	and find out what pleases the Lord.
Dok wun wegi lutic, wuti bene ki luticwu i yo acel-lu	because you know that the Lord will reward each one for whatever good they do, whether they are slave or free.
pe wuyel nyakono pien tye ki ruk 	don't bother the girl because she is menstruating 
pe wanngeyo gin angoo ma miyo latin man lwal twatwal 	we do not know why this child is very gloomy and cheerless 
Ento Petero owacce ni, “Centeni myero orweny woko matwal, kacel ki in, pien itamo pi wilo mot pa Lubaŋa ki lim! 	Peter answered: “May your money perish with you, because you thought you could buy the gift of God with money!
gin moo ducu ma en timmo 	anything that he does
otorro itte 	he decided not to hear or listen
latin kic winyo pwony ki ibad dero	an orphan hears good advice from behind the granary
olwokke labac labac 	he partially washed 
cak jaar madowong i tuno ka min latin cammo cam maber 	much milk is produced in the breast if the mother eats very good food
mac onogo peke me teddo ci gupiyo yat ci mac obinno cut 	there was no fire for cooking and therefore they drilled the wood and fire came
nyonlobo wek gimwon ki ot 	trample on this soil so that it may be used for plastering the (walls of) house 
piŋo balo ŋom nono?’ 	Cut it down! Why should it use up the soil?’
Ento kwona doŋ pe obedo gin me wel ki tuŋ bota, pe pire doŋ dit ki bota, ento myero an doŋ acob ŋwecca keken ki dog tic ma alimo ki bot Rwotwa Yecu, me tito lok me kwena maber me kica pa Lubaŋa. 	However, I consider my life worth nothing to me; my only aim is to finish the race and complete the task the Lord Jesus has given me—the task of testifying to the good news of God’s grace.
gocce rac mada goyo litino dok marac twal 	his way of beating is very bad, he beats the children very badly
tar lak miyo wanyero	it is to show the whiteness of our teeth that we laugh
Pien kop ma wuŋolo-ni bene gibiŋolo i komwu, dok gin ma wupimo kwede jami, en aye doki gibipimo kwede jami botwu. 	“Do not judge, or you too will be judged.
put layata woko 	uproot the potatoes 
I nino meno wubiŋeyo ni an atye i Won, ki wun i an, ki an i wun. 	Because I live, you also will live.
guketo ka tyen lukwena, ka gupoko kit ma mitte bot ŋat acel acel. 	and put it at the apostles’ feet, and it was distributed to anyone who had need.
Dok bene myero watamu kit macalo watwero tugo kwede cwinywa kekenwa i mar ki i tiyo tic mabeco, 	And let us consider how we may spur one another on toward love and good deeds,
wod pa Matatia, wod pa Amoc, wod pa Nakum, wod pa Eceli, wod pa Naggai, 	the son of Mattathias, the son of Amos, the son of Nahum, the son of Esli, the son of Naggai,
cweta me yer en aye lyet me arukka ka piny ngic 	woollen sweaters are the ones which are warm for wearing when the weather is cold
myerro wugwokke mada ki jalle pien en mukko lok mogo ma donggo noggo wiye ki terre bene pe 	be careful with that fellow because he sometimes comes with terrible stories which have no beginnings or endings, in other words, complete lies
Ladit ma loyo tic me yot kom(Dairekta) tin citto ka limmo ot yat 	Director of Medical Services today is going to inspect the hospital
myero iniag adada ni, eno en aye yoo ma atir	you must or should truly understand that, that is the right way
Lubaŋa cut oyere me bedo ajwaka madit i kit pa Melkijedek. 	and was designated by God to be high priest in the order of Melchizedek.
akwaani kic en aye gitimmo me kendala me mac me menynyo i ot	honeycombs is the thing, which is used to make candles for lighting
27“Wubineno can, wun Lupwony-cik ki Luparicayo, wun lugoba! Pien wurom ki lyel ma gipuyo ki gin matar, kun ki yo tuŋ woko nen maber, ento igi noŋo opoŋ ki cogo pa jo muto, ki jami ducu ma keni keken. 	Blind Pharisee! First clean the inside of the cup and dish, and then the outside also will be clean.
gwok cammo ringo ma remo ci reyo dongge i ngom me jwayo remone woko 	a dog eats uncooked meat and then cleans the blood from it's mouth by rubbing it on the ground 
gam lok ma acooni ni 	reply to what I wrote to you last 
Pi meno wugwokke kit ma wuwinyo ki lok	Therefore consider carefully how you listen
Ci gupiyo dano i muŋ kun giwaco ni, “Wawinyo en ka loko kun yeto Moses ki Lubaŋa.” 	Then they secretly persuaded some men to say, “We have heard Stephen speak blasphemous words against Moses and against God.”
Yecu ojukogi ni pe myero giwek dano oŋeye. 	But he gave them strict orders not to tell others about him.
Cutcut otiŋa, otera woko wa i wi got mo madit mabor twatwal, kun onoŋo Cwiny Maleŋ doŋ oyuto tamma woko, ka onyutta Jerucalem, gaŋ maleŋ, ma oa ki i polo bot Lubaŋa bino piny, 	And he carried me away in the Spirit to a mountain great and high, and showed me the Holy City, Jerusalem, coming down out of heaven from God.
Iyo, Rwot, doŋ inen bura megi, ci imi wan luticci watit lokki ki tekcwiny laboŋo lworo mo, 	Now, Lord, consider their threats and enable your servants to speak your word with great boldness.
Ento lok pa Lubaŋa onya omedde ameda. 	But the word of God continued to spread and flourish.
pe ngeyo ketto moo maber i kom mukati ma gigolo, patto mere moone apatta 	he does not know how to spread butter on the side of breads, he simply smear thick butter on the bread 
teke me gurro laa nyo pyen 	pins of wood for pinning and stretching hide
ento acako tuco lok, mukwoŋo i Damaciko, ka lacen i Jerucalem ki lobo Judaya ducu ki bot lurok bene, kun atito botgi ni myero guŋut i kom balgi, gulokke gudwog cen bot Lubaŋa, dok guti kit tim ma nyuto ni doŋ guŋut. 	First to those in Damascus, then to those in Jerusalem and in all Judea, and then to the Gentiles, I preached that they should repent and turn to God and demonstrate their repentance by their deeds.
lok anywar i kin dano pe ber 	using abusive words among the people is not good
langala ramo boo ki toyo	the haughty person devours dewy green vegtables
longgo piny 	going round and round, surveying
kom dano myel ka tye ki two maleriya  	the body shakes when it has malaria
alwor wot kenna dyewor 	I am afraid of walking alone at night
memba adii me Paliament ma gubinno? 	how many members of parliament came? 
lyec tin obinno ki wor ci ocammo geya woko liweng ma i poto 	an elephant came last night and ate all the sorghum in the field 
wubin waneke woko, wek lim ma en bileyo-nu obed mewa.’ 	Come, let’s kill him, and the inheritance will be ours.’
Pi lworo en omiyo lukur-piny komgi omyel, ci gudoko calo jo muto. 	His appearance was like lightning, and his clothes were white as snow.
Doŋ ki tuŋ boti, in iŋeyo ni in latel lutowaŋ, in i ceŋ ma ryeny menyo dano ma gitye i piny macol, 	if you know his will and approve of what is superior because you are instructed by the law;
Mumiyo cula nam ducu guriŋo woko, ki godi ducu bene doŋ gurwenyo woko ma pe doŋ giromo noŋogi. 	Every island fled away and the mountains could not be found.
ogoyo lak Bette 	he struck his flank
gee otwinyo woko ki i um latin 	clean out the mucus from the child's nose
awene ma ceng inenne 	when did you see him
I kare ma Jon cobo ticce, owacci, ‘Wun wutamo ni an aŋa? An pe a dano ma wukuro-ni	As John was completing his work, he said: ‘Who do you suppose I am? I am not the one you are looking for
yab karatac tyeng able me Jiri pa Matayo cura abic 	open the third line, of the fifth chapter of Matthew 
Dano mukwoŋo obino i nyime, owaco ni, ‘Ladit, ciliŋ miya ma imiya-ni omedde iye ciliŋ alip acel mukene.’ 	“The first one came and said, ‘Sir, your mina has earned ten more.’
min Akelo tye ka pwoyo cak i ot 	Akelo's mother is churning the milk in the house 
Wuket parwu ducu i kome, pien en tamo piwu. 	Humble yourselves, therefore, under God’s mighty hand, that he may lift you up in due time.
oa pud ka cam kom bedi 	he has just come from eating
latin man lapelle mada 	this is a restless and unruly child 
Cakke kombeddi, doŋ pe imat pii keken, mat bene koŋo vino manok pi konyo ii pi two ma maki kare ki kare. 	Keep yourself pure.
bao ne yot ni pao pao 	the wood is very light
wek doŋ pe gubed ka keto cwinygi me winyo lok pa Lujudaya me ododo mogo ma tere pe, ki cik pa jo ma gidag lok ada. 	Therefore rebuke them sharply, so that they will be sound in the faith
ento myero wacoyu warag botgi ni pe gucam gin mo ma gityero i nyim jogi, pien odoko gin me kwer, pe gutim tim tarwaŋ, pe gucam riŋo lee ma gideyo adeya, pe gucam remo. 	Instead we should write to them, telling them to abstain from food polluted by idols, from sexual immorality, from the meat of strangled animals and from blood.
bongone komme gweke gweke maber mada 	the clothes of good design, with various colours and patterns
Ka otyeko loko lok meno, ci orumo coŋe piny olego kwedgi ducu. 	When Paul had finished speaking, he knelt down with all of them and prayed.
Yecu owaco botgi ni, “I dyewor matin, wun ducu wubitenya woko kena, pien yam gicoyo ni, ‘Abigoyo lakwat, ci romi gibiket woko ata.’ 	Then Jesus told them, “This very night you will all fall away on account of me, for it is written: “‘I will strike the shepherd, and the sheep of the flock will be scattered.’
jubi ma ginekkoni, en open mere ki em 	he is lucky he got the thigh from the bufallo killed 
ma pe wacce 	which cannot be spoken about
rig o ma moone pe, pe kuur 	the meat which is not fatty it is not nice 
En ocako kwoŋŋe kun lamme kekene ni, “An pe aŋeyo dano man ma wun wuloko pireni.” 	He began to call down curses, and he swore to them, “I don’t know this man you’re talking about.”
dano ka dong omeer ci twerro tungge ka kweny i lok mo ma teerre pe 	once a man is drunk, he can start fighting for no reason
Litino pa lameru ma giyero gumoti.	Anyone who welcomes them shares in their wicked work.
awinynyo gin mo timme ni pung pung myerro obed it lyec matye kangoone kit meno 	I hear deep flapping noises, it must be an elephant's ears which are flapping and making the noises 
cokko lok i kom dano 	accusing people falsely
pe giŋeyo yo me kuc.” 	ruin and misery mark their ways,
jami mapol dong nongge kany 	many things are found here now 
mon nyek tin guyette ma guyaarro racca gi ducu ka ma leng 	the co-wives today abused each other very much and revealed all their bad behaviour and manners 
[Pien Wod pa dano obino ka laro jo murwenyo.] 	For the Son of Man came to seek and to save the lost.
I Jerucalem, i ŋet dogcel me romo, yam tye iye kut ma gilwoŋo i dog jo Ibru ni Beteceda, ma tye iye bolo abic. 	Some time later, Jesus went up to Jerusalem for one of the Jewish festivals.
Pien gin ducu ma tye i lobo, macalo miti me komwa ma ginywalowa kwede, ki miti marac pi gin ma waneno ki waŋwa, ki dok wakke ki jami ma watye kwede i kwowa, magi ducu pe gua ki bot Won, ento gucakke i lobo kany. 	For everything in the world—the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life—comes not from the Father but from the world.
myero kong inong gin mo manyen ka dong ibin 	you should discover a new thing and then come 
gunotte kacel me konynyo luwotgi 	they united themselves to help their friends
Ento macalo en yam ociko, watye ka kuro polo manyen ki lobo manyen, ka ma kit ma atir bedo iye. 	But in keeping with his promise we are looking forward to a new heaven and a new earth, where righteousness dwells.
ka pii opoŋ, ci kulu ocorre i kom ot, ento pe otwero yeŋone, pien bigero maber. 	When a flood came, the torrent struck that house but could not shake it, because it was well built.
Ento ki tuŋ bota onoŋo atamo ni dwogowa botwu myero pe dok okel botwu remcwiny. 	God made him who had no sin to be sin for us, so that in him we might become the righteousness of God.
dano abongwen keken aye gubinno	only nine people came
kella madara me nenno wang	bring me a mirror
niang i lok ber 	to understand the matter 
ocello ki atero ni tin 	he shot and hit decisively with an arrow
ento lok pa Rwot ma en oloko bedo matwal.Lok meno en aye lok me kwena maber ma yam gitito botwu.	For, “All people are like grass, and all their glory is like the flowers of the field; the grass withers and the flowers fall,
en pe ngeyo jwaano kikopo jabu?   	does he not know how to polish golden cups?
lacan ma kwo pe kinyero	no one laughs at the poor man as long as he lives
en gammo cam ki bot minne 	he gets or receives food from his mother
Makatone ducu, utmegina, pe wukwoŋ kwoŋ ki nyiŋ polo, kadi ki nyiŋ lobo, kadi kit kwoŋ mukene ducu	Above all, my brothers and sisters, do not swear—not by heaven or by earth or by anything else
ange dong een	i wish i knew always comes afterwards
gwogi gitye ka itte 	the dogs are having sexual intercourse
opii dog adwora	a slave should not be pampered
En ogamo doggi ni, “Aŋeyo atir ni wubibolo carolok man i koma, ni, ‘Daktar, caŋŋe keni, tic ma yam wawinyo itiyo i Kapernaum, ti kany bene i pacowa kikome.’ ” 	Jesus said to them, “Surely you will quote this proverb to me: ‘Physician, heal yourself!’ And you will tell me, ‘Do here in your hometown what we have heard that you did in Capernaum.’”
poyo gweno 	a well growing, middle sized fowls 
mitto ywayo twon ot mo madit mape wacce 	he wants to build a very big house
Ento lwak man ma kwiya cik doŋ gicenogi.” 	“Have any of the rulers or of the Pharisees believed in him?
Ka ce dano mo waco ni emaro Lubaŋa, kun dag ominne, noŋo en lagoba	Whoever claims to love God yet hates a brother or sister is a liar
Ento lwak ducu gudaŋŋe lawaŋacel ni, “Tere woko! Gony botwa Baraba!” 	But the whole crowd shouted, “Away with this man! Release Barabbas to us!”
ŋo kono ma dano twero timo i koma?” 	What can mere mortals do to me?”
Menu dwarra mo peke  	I have no body to intervene for me such as a lawyer or an intercessor
wang wol pyerre lit 	his hip joint is painful 
odero rut aa i ot	the winnowing basket of millet flour for celebrating twin births comes from the house in which the twins are born
latin tye ka joyo tyen leela woko 	the child is deflating the bicycle tyres 
cit ki lokki cen kwica	get off from here with your kind of talks
“Tyengi yot giriŋo kwede madwir ka neko dano, 	“Their mouths are full of cursing and bitterness.”
Pien Kricito bene yam oneno can pi bal, kicel ma otyeko lok ducu	For it is better, if it is God’s will, to suffer for doing good than for doing evil.
Pe dok wapakke kenwa, ento watye ka miyo botwu gin ma myero wuwakke kwede piwa, wek wubed ki yo me gamo dog jo ma giwakke pi gin ma nen ki woko, pe pi kit ma dano tye kwede i cwinye. 	What we are is plain to God, and I hope it is also plain to your conscience.
wamitto buk mada me Jongorapia me akwana pi kilac agwen 	we want very much Geography books for reading of class four 
dano pud peya guryeyo maber i tyeng 	people have not yet lined up very well
laguk tic aguka 	an unsteady person in any work
wangeogge ongwec woko 	his knee is dislocated 
Man otimme wek lok ma yam lanebi Icaya oloko ocobbe kakare ni, “En otiŋo gorowa, dok otiŋo twowa ducu i kome.” 	He touched her hand and the fever left her, and she got up and began to wait on him.
lokke cwerro cwiny mada 	his talk is very annoying
oneno atwom mada i gangpa rwot 	he suffered too much torture in the chief's palace
doggola oteg woko pe Torre 	the door is bent, and cannot be shut
lekke nino ducu pe beddo lek maber 	his dreams are always bad dreams
en tye ki ryeko me yubbo jami ma pat pat 	he has many knowledge and skills in repairing many things
wal lum ma i dyekal 	gather and remove all the grass in the compound
tong go yat 	felling a tree or cutting a tree 
pien pe waciko waŋwa i kom gin ma nen, ento i kom gin ma pe nen. Gin ma nen bedo pi kare manok mo keken, ento gin ma pe nen ri nakanaka.	All this is for your benefit, so that the grace that is reaching more and more people may cause thanksgiving to overflow to the glory of God.
tye kit layuta ma pat pat 	there are many types of traps 
Yecu okatti woko botgi kun oruko lalukana okuto ki boŋo makwar. Pilato owaccigi ni, “Nenu dano man.” 	Once more Pilate came out and said to the Jews gathered there, “Look, I am bringing him out to you to let you know that I find no basis for a charge against him.”
cam maber ki litino mapud gitino en aye guti meegi me donggo ma becco 	good feeding of the children while they are still young is the base of their growing well in future 
Pien en myero obed ka loc, nio ka Lubaŋa biketo lukworre ducu piny i te tyene. 	For he must reign until he has put all his enemies under his feet.
Ka oo ci oneno tic me kica pa Lubaŋa, cwinye obedo yom iye. Ocuko cwinygi me moko i kom Rwot matek ki cwinygi ducu. 	When he arrived and saw what the grace of God had done, he was glad and encouraged them all to remain true to the Lord with all their hearts.
tat tee lokke maber  	investigate the matter carefully
ci openyogi ni, “Wubimiya gin aŋo ka amiye i ciŋwu?” Ci gucule ki lim ryal pyeradek ma onoŋo obedo lim me kare ca. 	and asked, “What are you willing to give me if I deliver him over to you?” So they counted out for him thirty pieces of silver.
Yecu odok iye ni, “Atito botwu ni, ka kono jo-ni guliŋ, godi magi kikomgi kono gudaŋŋe.” 	“I tell you,” he replied, “if they keep quiet, the stones will cry out.”
baone ka gijwayo ci bok maber mada 	when the wood is polished it becomes very brown
jal ka icammo cam imunynyo akwili kit meno ci koni inoggo lit ic	you, if you eat and swallow the food wholly like that,you will soon get stomach ache
mokone tika pwot? pe abongo ka kit pwotte 	is the flour smooth? no I did not feel its smoothness
I tur nyime gicoyo iye nyiŋ mo ma te lokke obedo me muŋ, ni, “Babilon madit, megi mon ducu ma gin malaya, ki jo ducu ma gitimo tim me kwer.” 	The name written on her forehead was a mystery: babylon the great the mother of prostitutes and of the abominations of the earth.
wot palaa ki i akurane 	draw out the knife from its sheath 
Yam gicoyo ni, “Aŋa ma ŋeyo tam pa Rwot? Aŋa ma yam miye tam?” Ento wan watye ki tam pa Kricito	for, “Who has known the mind of the Lord so as to instruct him?” But we have the mind of Christ.
Ento pe gibimedde kwede nakanaka, pien miŋoginu biŋene woko bot lwak, calo pa jo aryo ca. 	They are men of depraved minds, who, as far as the faith is concerned, are rejected.
otigo guniya me cukari oluu ocitto kwede 	he took the whole bag of sugar and went with it
Bot jo ma doŋ gunyomme, acikogi ni dako pe okwer cware, ento man pe an aye ma aciko, Rwot gire aye muciko. 	To the married I give this command (not I, but the Lord): A wife must not separate from her husband.
ogwal tye ka woo 	the frogs are croaking 
alwette girukko i Iwet cing me kayo kal 	alwette is worn on one of the fingers for cutting the millet
kot tin tye ka cweer mada 	it is raining too much today or today it is raining too much 
Grik yang guloyo lobo mapol mada 	long time ago the Greeks ruled many countries
pit tek mada 	upbringing is very difficult(costly)
ladit oo i kot ka gipenynye pe dong dok iye maber ento baggo lok abagga 	in the court when the man was asked, he could not answer well but spoke in a muddled way
Pilipo onoŋo Natanael, otitte ni, “Watyeko noŋo ŋat ma Moses yam ocoyo pire i cik, ma lunebi bene gucoyo pire, en aye Yecu me Najaret, wod pa Yucepu.” 	Philip, like Andrew and Peter, was from the town of Bethsaida.
lut latin lakere i pit ma lyet wek omii en okonynye 	immerse the neonate into the warm water to make it pass stool
Iŋeyo bene ni, cakke i tinoni iŋeyo coc maleŋ ma yam gicoyo ma twero pwonyi i yo me larre pi ye Kricito Yecu. 	But as for you, continue in what you have learned and have become convinced of, because you know those from whom you learned it,
Ci Petero ogamo doge owacce ni, “Rwot, ka meno aye in, ci wek abin boti kunnu kun awoto ki i wi pii.” 	Don’t be afraid.”
niang i lok ber 	understanding the matter
Ento laditte odokke iye ni, ‘In latic marac dok bene in lawackom! Onoŋo iŋeyo ni akayo ka ma pe acoyo iye kodi, dok bene acoko ka ma yam pe aketo iye? 	“His master replied, ‘You wicked, lazy servant! So you knew that I harvest where I have not sown and gather where I have not scattered seed?
Ento myero mel oyokke i cula mo aye.” 	Nevertheless, we must run aground on some island.”
Pi niye Moses, ka doŋ odoŋo, pe oye ni myero gilwoŋe ni en e wod pa nya pa Parao, 	By faith Moses, when he had grown up, refused to be known as the son of Pharaoh’s daughter.
dano ma ryek mada ka i kom lok me gwokko lim 	he is very prudent in the matters of keeping money
tye ka panne i ot 	he is hiding in the house 
Ka doŋ gugure i kom yatariya, ci gupoko boŋŋine woko i kingi kun gibolo iye kwir. 	There they offered Jesus wine to drink, mixed with gall; but after tasting it, he refused to drink it.
ma gin bene pi niye omiyo gulwenyo ki luker me lobo mapatpat, guloyogi, gutiyo gin ma tye atir, gunoŋo gin ma yam Lubaŋa ociko pire. Gutweyo dog labwor-gu woko, 	who through faith conquered kingdoms, administered justice, and gained what was promised; who shut the mouths of lions,
Pien latim marac mere gibicule pi gin marac ma en otimo, pien Rwot pe poko kin dano.	Whatever you do, work at it with all your heart, as working for the Lord, not for human masters,
okeng nenno tukko rette 	he missed seeing wrestling 
Owot okatto woko li pit 	Owot disappeared unnoticed from here, or Owot went out unnoticed from here
dano tin gucubbe mada i dwar ki lee 	today speared many animals during hunting
pe wanngeyo gin angoo ma okello tubbe me Iweny 	we do not know what brought the falling out into fighting 
Kadi bed guloko lok meno, juko lwak wek pe gutyer gitum botgi obedo tek twatwal. 	Even with these words, they had difficulty keeping the crowd from sacrificing to them.
Wun wuworo gin ma pe wuŋeyo, wan waworo gin ma waŋeyo, pien larre oa ki bot Lujudaya. 	Our ancestors worshiped on this mountain, but you Jews claim that the place where we must worship is in Jerusalem.”
en doŋ omiyo waŋeyo muŋ me mit mere, kun lubo yub maber ma ceŋ en oyubo me cobo i Kricito. 	In him we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins, in accordance with the riches of God’s grace
Wuti man kun wuŋeyo kare ma wutye iye, ni, kare doŋ oromo myero wuco woko ki i waŋ nino. Pien larrewa doŋ onyiko cok twatwal, kato ma i kare ma yam wakwoŋo ye iye Rwot-ti. 	Therefore love is the fulfillment of the law.
ma onoŋo lok donyo matut i cwinye ni, Lubaŋa twero tiyo gin ma ocikke pire. 	Yet he did not waver through unbelief regarding the promise of God, but was strengthened in his faith and gave glory to God,
“Ento i kare ma kabaka odonyo i ot ka neno welo, ci oneno laco mo obedo kunnu ma pe onoŋo oruko boŋo me nyom. 	So go to the street corners and invite to the banquet anyone you find.’
potto cim 	he has an epilepsy or he suffers from epilepsy 
wun ducu ulle wudok tung eel 	he went to empty the dregs of lye
pur ki orok jayo wii nom ajaya 	cultivatimg with a hoe which is fixed to a long shaft, cultivates only superficially
mitto poorro war aryoni wek ekwany iye acel maber 	wants to compare the two pairs of shoes in order to take one of them
roo tyenni i waar 	push your foot into the shoe
cur kal 	pound the millet
Pien i kare ma yam pud watye i kwo me anywalli, gin maraco me bal ma cik doŋ otugo woko onoŋo tye ka tic i dul komwa mapatpat me nyako nyige pi to. 	So, my brothers and sisters, you also died to the law through the body of Christ, that you might belong to another, to him who was raised from the dead, in order that we might bear fruit for God.
Ci Petero ocako po lok ma nene Yecu owacce ni, “Ma noŋo twon gweno peya okok, ibikwera woko tyen adek kulu.” Ci okato woko okok ki cwercwiny madwoŋ	Then Peter remembered the word Jesus had spoken: “Before the rooster crows, you will disown me three times.” And he went outside and wept bitterly.
cammi remme 	your food is not enough for him 
Kombeddi doŋ ginyuto woko ka maleŋ i lok ma lunebi yam gucoyo ma omiyo lurok ducu guŋeyo kit macalo Lubaŋa ma pe to yam ociko, wek omi gulub niye. 	Now to him who is able to establish you in accordance with my gospel, the message I proclaim about Jesus Christ, in keeping with the revelation of the mystery hidden for long ages past,
ci en okano dul lim mogo woko ma dakone bene ŋeyo, ka okelo dul acel, ci oketo ka tyen lukwena. 	With his wife’s full knowledge he kept back part of the money for himself, but brought the rest and put it at the apostles’ feet.
tye layata lawangge aryo ma limme ki mabot, mabotte ni en aye lyata muno 	there are twb types of potatoes the sweet and the non sweet ones, the non sweet ones are the European potatoes 
man en aye pii me awukka ki dong 	this is the water for rinsing the mouth 
Ka ce en Daudi aye yam olwoŋe ni Rwot, ci en dok bedo lakwarre niŋiŋ?” Lwak mapol guwinyo lokke ki yomcwiny madwoŋ mada. 	David himself calls him ‘Lord.’ How then can he be his son?” The large crowd listened to him with delight.
ma Lubaŋa okano iye lonyone ducu me ryeko ki ŋec. 	My goal is that they may be encouraged in heart and united in love, so that they may have the full riches of complete understanding, in order that they may know the mystery of God, namely, Christ,
pii tye ka jibbo i cupuria.	the water is simmering in the aluminium saucepan
Pien aneno ni kony mo pe me cwalo lamabuc ka pe ginyuto lok ma i kome.”	For I think it is unreasonable to send a prisoner on to Rome without specifying the charges against him.”
Cik onoŋo odonyo iye me nyayo bal	For just as through the disobedience of the one man the many were made sinners, so also through the obedience of the one man the many will be made righteous.
tud tol aryo eno wek obed mabor 	knot the two ropes to make it long 
gin angoo ma wumitto timmo ne ni ma wutye ka kwillo lok akwilla?	what are you up to, that you are only whispering or what are you planning to do that you are only whispering? 
dirre cen 	move away
tye ka binynyo waro me tol me cikko aweno 	he is twisting cotton wool into thread for trapping the guinea fowls
Ento guguteŋo apwa woko ki i tyengi me bedo caden i komgi, ka gucito i Ikonio. 	So they shook the dust off their feet as a warning to them and went to Iconium.
gwee bongone ka ngwec akura pe iye 	smell her clothes if there is no smell of perfume on them
miyo abijolowu, 	Therefore, “Come out from them and be separate, says the Lord
Dano gitwero tito lok niŋniŋ ka pe giorogi? Kit macalo yam gicoyo ni, “Neno tyengi ber rom mene jo ma kelo lok me kwena maber!” 	How, then, can they call on the one they have not believed in? And how can they believe in the one of whom they have not heard? And how can they hear without someone preaching to them?
lac i kabuto pe ber 	passing urine in bed is not good
wod pa Enoci, wod pa Ceji, wod pa Adam, wod pa Lubaŋa.	the son of Enosh, the son of Seth, the son of Adam, the son of God.
cec pa olwit pat ki pa okwata 	catch the key, which I am going to throw to you 
iye gon 	he has a clean heart
latin tye ka reene mada ki paala i komme 	the child is smearing himself very much with 
Cwinywu obed yom kare ducu. 	Rejoice always,
gwok ibed ka nenne ka en tye ka lwok  	do not watch her when she is taking bath
gitye ka lorro pipa me moo peterol 	they are rolling a drum of petrol
Niye aye ma moko gin ma dano geno, en gin ma niaŋowa maber ni, jami ma pe gineno komgi gitye. 	Now faith is confidence in what we hope for and assurance about what we do not see.
gin me urra  	a wonderful thing, a thing to be wondered at
Ojok larii lok twatwal omiyo mutokane giballo woke pien oriyo ni giyub oyot oyot 	Ojok is a very impatient person and because of that, he spoilt his car but wants it quickly repaired
teer tong i jeng i gwica ot 	take the spear and put it leaning in the corner of the house 
Pe bene gilwoŋwu ni lutel, pien wutye ki latelwu acel, ma en aye Kricito ma Lubaŋa oyero. 	And do not call anyone on earth ‘father,’ for you have one Father, and he is in heaven.
Gin ducu gumine ka lega ki cwiny acel, kacel ki mon ki Maliam min Yecu ki omegine. 	They all joined together constantly in prayer, along with the women and Mary the mother of Jesus, and with his brothers.
Ka Citefano opoŋ ki kica pa Lubaŋa ki tek, ci obedo ka tiyo taŋo ki lanyut i kin lwak. 	Now Stephen, a man full of God’s grace and power, performed great wonders and signs among the people.
ting gimatto ki oceke 	the beer from the dregs is sucked through a wooden pipe
otigo ma nok tyeko kwon	alittle otigo finishes a whole loaf
lacwii me cwiiyo remo kama rem 	a horn for sucking the blood from the part where there is much pain on the body
jooni laworro gugalle mada 	yesterday those people teased
myerro wuleg bot lalar mewu Yecu wek okonywu i pekko ma wutye kwedde 	pray to your saviour Jesus to save you from the problem which you have
nyetto dyang	milking the cow 
lokke getto iye mada 	the matter annoys him very much 
iloko atir ni, Lubaŋa tye acel, pe dok tye Lubaŋa mo mukene, kono en kene. 	“You are right in saying that God is one and there is no other but him.
Ka doŋ jo mucokke ducu guliŋ mot, kun giwinyo ka Barnaba ki Paulo gitito kit lanyut ki taŋo ma Lubaŋa obedo ka tiyogi ki ciŋgi i kin Lurok. 	The whole assembly became silent as they listened to Barnabas and Paul telling about the signs and wonders God had done among the Gentiles through them.
bongone odyak ni joto-joto 	his clothes are completely wet 
wang bur ki oboke pe dong gitiyo kwede i kare man 	cleaning the leg sore with leaves dipped in hot water
warre ducu pat pat 	all the shoes were different 
twoo anyoo kello too wang 	measles causes blindness
Ludito me lobo Acia mogo bene ma gin lureme gucwalo lok bote ni pe otem donyo i ka poro tuko. 	Even some of the officials of the province, friends of Paul, sent him a message begging him not to venture into the theater.
pwony litinno man ki pac 	teach these children carpentry 
pe ipyee apyeya i tic 	do not jump from one job to another
cukane twerro pette i wii kitanda 	the sheet can be spread on the bed
kun gin aye caden ma tito lok i koma	You study the Scriptures diligently because you think that in them you have eternal life
Kwanyo acel i kom gin aryo-ni ocuŋo wiya woko. Mitina tye ni kono ato wek abed kacel ki Kricito, pien meno aye ber makato ducu. 	For to me, to live is Christ and to die is gain.
ento jo ma gikwanogi ni myero guo i lobo maca, ki i cer ki i kin jo muto, pe ginyomo, pe gibigero co, 	But those who are considered worthy of taking part in the age to come and in the resurrection from the dead will neither marry nor be given in marriage,
Nikodemo openye ni, “Man twero timme niŋniŋ?” 	So it is with everyone born of the Spirit.”
Abiwaco ki cwinya ni, Cwinya, itye ki jami mapol ma birommi pi mwaka mapol	And I’ll say to myself, “You have plenty of grain laid up for many years
Ento Kerode rwot madit ma yam Jon ojuko pi Kerodia ci-ominne, 	But when John rebuked Herod the tetrarch because of his marriage to Herodias, his brother’s wife, and all the other evil things he had done,
dok bene in aye ma tiro lumiŋ, in lapwony pa litino, pien i cik itye ki ŋec ki lok ada kikome. 	if you are convinced that you are a guide for the blind, a light for those who are in the dark,
gitye ka yoorro pii i dye ot 	they are sprinkling the floor with water or spattering it with water
dini pa lukricitayo lunebi gin aye joo ma Lubaga ocwallo me pwonynyo dano ki me kello lok ma Lubaga ocwallo ki dano 	in the Christianity the prophets are the persons sent by God to teach the people and to bring them messages from him
Lunebi ma yam gutito pi kica ma gibimiyowu yam guyenyo matek, kun gipenyo lok i kom larre man. 	for you are receiving the end result of your faith, the salvation of your souls.
obeddo macalo burogi, gikutto akutta ci ento tye ki gin ma gidiyo ki i butte adek ma lokko dwanne ka gikutto 	it is just like bugle but it has three knobs at the side which is pressed when it is being blown to change the sound 
gin me menynyo ot maber, en aye elektriciti 	a thing for lighting the house, is electricity 
mitto poorro war aryoni wek ekwany iye acel maber 	wants to compare the two pairs of shoes in order to take one of them
bed ki tegge kuno	stay away there
lokwu miyo chine tirri woko ka coc 	your words make it hard for him to write
amitto mada obog tyen dyang me awangga wek odok lamwon bao 	I want very much the cow's hooves for burning them so that they become glue for sealling the wood 
Petero obedo i Jopa pi nino mapol tuŋ pa dano mo ma nyiŋe Cimon, lanyoŋ pyen.	Peter stayed in Joppa for some time with a tanner named Simon.
Ka oneno Yecu, ci odaŋŋe oryebbe i nyime, owaco ki dwan maloŋo ni, “Ilaro aŋo kweda, Yecu, Wod pa Lubaŋa Mamalo Twal? Abako doga boti, pe iyela.” 	When he saw Jesus, he cried out and fell at his feet, shouting at the top of his voice, “What do you want with me, Jesus, Son of the Most High God? I beg you, don’t torture me!”
ento i i el do wau wau ci yot 	the foam mattress looks big but light
ryammo dano ki i wang tic	to dismiss a person from the work
Doŋ atyeko coyo lok mogo bot lwak dano muye Kricito, ento Diotrepe, ma mito kette kene me bedo latel wigi, pe oye twerona. 	We ought therefore to show hospitality to such people so that we may work together for the truth.
yoo ne ding wot maber gwokke pe iyokke ki twok meja 	the path is narrow, be careful that you do not knock the corner of the table
citto ka lillo tyenne maleng	to go to clean his legs very clean
jwaa yer wii maber  	brush your hair very well
Kapten owaco ni, “An awilo dit man ki lwak lim mabup.” Paulo owaco ni, “Ento an ginywala kwede anywala.” 	Then the commander said, “I had to pay a lot of money for my citizenship.” “But I was born a citizen,” Paul replied.
kongone kec mada mitto acomma ki pii nyo coda ka wek omatte	the alcohol is too strong, it needs water or soda to be added to it to dilute it, to make it drinkable
dano ducu ballo pe lye gatti mo ma wacci en pe eballo 	everybody sins, nobody can say that he does not sin
Gwokke wek leŋo ma tye i ii-ni pe odok col. 	See to it, then, that the light within you is not darkness.
ilokogi gudoko lwak pa Lubaŋa ma en loyo, ma gin aye doŋ ajwagi ma gitiyo bote, gin bene gibiloyo lobo.” 	You have made them to be a kingdom and priests to serve our God, and they will reign on the earth.”
Catan owacce ni, “Ka in i Wod pa Lubaŋa, wac ki got man olokke odok kwon.” 	The devil said to him, “If you are the Son of God, tell this stone to become bread.”
Pien Pilato onoŋo oŋeyo woko ni gumiyo Yecu bote pi nyeko. 	So when the crowd had gathered, Pilate asked them, “Which one do you want me to release to you: Jesus Barabbas, or Jesus who is called the Messiah?”
ngii ki luwotti ma wutye kwedgi i dong tic 	be friendly with the colleagues with whom you are working
potto i bal  	falling into sin
ticce ducu gukke agukka iye 	he is unsteady in all his work does not do them perfectly well and complete them
jalle lwor twatwal, ka onenno gwok ci ywiiyo nyo ywiine ki twon ngwec mo matek mada  agoro pe camo kato kulu	the fellow is a coward when he sees a dog, he takes off at a very high speedagoro termites do not cross a stream to feed on the other side
Ŋat ma kwera, okwero Wora bene. 	They will treat you this way because of my name, for they do not know the one who sent me.
Yecu ocako nenogi, ci owacci, “Ki bot dano pe twerre, ento ki bot Lubaŋa twerre, pien gin ducu twerre ki bot Lubaŋa.” 	Jesus looked at them and said, “With man this is impossible, but not with God; all things are possible with God.”
Myero ginen ka ticce ber, ka ce yam opito litino, ka yam ojolo welo, nyo olwoko tyen jo pa Lubaŋa, ka okonyo jo ma yam giunogi, dok bene ka obedo ŋat ma yam omine kene i tiyo gin maber i yo ducu. 	No widow may be put on the list of widows unless she is over sixty, has been faithful to her husband,
joo Lamogi bene gukanne i Guruguru i kare ma gunekko dano 	the people of Lamogi also hid in Guruguru when they killed people 
tye ka lyerre pi kic ma gitye ka cammone 	he is hanging around for the honey which is being eaten 
tic maber en aye ma gipwoyo 	good work is the one that is thanked
pele pa latin meno owekko gigoye 	for his unrulybehaviour and restlessness made her him to be beaten
olik ka tye ka nino lyerre alyerra luggo wiye dok piny makko yat ki tyenne aryo me gee 	when a bat is sleeping it hangs on a tree with its head downwards, it holds the tree with its back legs
owacco atir ni en pe engeyo gin ma otimme laworo 	he said quite frankly that he did not know what happened yesterday 
ket ongwec ki lakologoc i nak 	put the pestle and the spoon in the cupboard 
an pe amaaro lwokke i babu 	i do not like bathing in the bathtub
myerro pe ijer gatti mo i kin dano 	you should not humiliate anybody publicly by telling him his tribal status
Lupwonnyene guwinyo ka en wacci, “Ŋat mo pe ocam nyigi matwal.” 	Then he said to the tree, “May no one ever eat fruit from you again.” And his disciples heard him say it.
mil rukca igi wek gucitti 	give them permission so that they may go
dano ma olarre 	a person who is saved 
Kiniga omako min kulu i kom dako-nu, ci ocito oero lweny i kom likwayo pa dako ca mukene-gu ducu, i kom jo ma gilubo cik pa Lubaŋa, ma gimako bene lok me caden ma Yecu omiyo. Ka doŋ ocuŋ i kweyo me dog nam.	Then the dragon was enraged at the woman and went off to wage war against the rest of her offspring—those who keep God’s commands and hold fast their testimony about Jesus.
Nyimege gucwalo kwena bote kun giwaco ni, “Rwot, ŋat ma imaro kome lit.” 	(This Mary, whose brother Lazarus now lay sick, was the same one who poured perfume on the Lord and wiped his feet with her hair.)
dano ma moc komme lye inenno ki cweyone 	a man who is well nourished you can see with his size
Ocan dok laminne twatwal pe binno oyot ka wumitto ka citto kwede kamoo oyot oyot 	Okot is always late when you want to go with him somewhere quickly, he is always meandering about
Dano mo i kingi onoŋo lapwony-cik, oteme openye ki peny acel, ni 	Hearing that Jesus had silenced the Sadducees, the Pharisees got together.
Omiyo gupako Lubaŋa pira.	They only heard the report: “The man who formerly persecuted us is now preaching the faith he once tried to destroy.”
Ka jo mukene apar-ri guwinyo lokke, ci cwinygi ocako cwer i kom Yakobo ki Jon. 	When the ten heard about this, they became indignant with James and John.
Ka Luroma gutyeko ŋiyo lokka, gumito ni gigonya woko, pien onoŋo pe tye tyen kop mo ma romo neka. 	They examined me and wanted to release me, because I was not guilty of any crime deserving death.
toile gao dyang twero coddo woko, eak it	the rope is weak, the cows can break it
cig acel acel tye iye nyigge nyo nyig cig abic	each hand has five fingers
dotto dano i kom gin ma gulokko kacel 	betraying the people on what they have discussed together 
latin dong ocammo oyeg ki cam 	the child has eaten and is satisfied 
wacito kwedde Kampala kacel ki motokane ci odwoggo obwotta woko labongo wacca gin mo 	we went together to Kampala in his car, but he returned and left me there without telling me anything
pen litino lukere ma gitweyo terro nino abic kadong potto 	it takes five days for the stump of the neonate's umbilicus which was tied to fall off
dano gitye ka gurrone ni Okwera en aye ma okwallo 	people are murmuring that Okwera is the one who stole
awobe man ducu gitye ki mecgi 	all these boys have got their secret girlfriends
okwata ceyo litino gweno woko ka pe iummogi i tee cengege 	the kite will snatch the chicks if you do not cover them under a wire gauze 
ka ibeddo ka gwenynyo adong ci medde madit mada	if you continue to scratch the keloid, it becomes very big
Pien kare me cako ŋolo kop doŋ oromo, kun cakke ki i jo pa Lubaŋa. Man ka ocakke ki botwa, ci agikki pa jo ma gukwero winyo lok me kwena maber ma oa ki bot Lubaŋa bibedo niŋniŋ? 	However, if you suffer as a Christian, do not be ashamed, but praise God that you bear that name.
tokke ki koko nyo dagge 	sudden starting of crying or shouting 
pi takko wiye tegge oyot oyot omiyo racac pe ocello wiye 	for moving his head aside quickly his head was not hit by the bullet 
gadde ki cam pe gin maber pien kello cweyo ki pekko me wot pa remo 	eating excessively is not good because it brings fatness and blood pressure
onongo tye ka kokko ci giburro ki odoo ci oling woko ni cwic 	he was crying and when he was frightened with a stick, he stopped quietly at once
Lacwec pe ki twero i kom lobo, me cweyo atabo acel me wel ki mukene ma pe me wel, kun tiyo ki lobo ma en oŋino aŋina acel madit? 	But who are you, a human being, to talk back to God? “Shall what is formed say to the one who formed it, ‘Why did you make me like this?’”
Ka Moses oneno, ouro kite	When he saw this, he was amazed at the sight
gin laywee dye kal tye kwene? 	where is the thing for sweeping the compound of the house?
Dano ma oto-ni oa, obedo, ocako lok. Yecu omiye bot minne. 	The dead man sat up and began to talk, and Jesus gave him back to his mother.
gin mape lyakke en aye lamola 	the one thing that cannot be smoothly ground is lamola
pi meno abigoye, ci abigonye. [ 	Therefore, I will punish him and then release him.”
Ento Tito ma onywako wot kweda, kadi bed onoŋo en Lagrik, pe gibedo ka diye ni myero gilire. 	Let us not become conceited, provoking and envying each other.
tyen motoka ma i kunyimme ni dong tye ka too woke 	the front tyre of the car is deflating
Lwak pa Lubaŋa ducu gumotowu. 	Greet one another with a holy kiss.
“Wutye ki gum ka dano ŋalowu, kun giyelowu ma giwaco kit lok ducu maraco gobagoba i komwu pira. 	“Blessed are you when people insult you, persecute you and falsely say all kinds of evil against you because of me.
Kica meno pwonyowa me kwero lubo kit pa jo ma pe lworo Lubaŋa, kacel ki miti ducu me lobo man, dok pwonyowa me gwokke kenwa wek wabed ma cwinywa atir, kun walworo Lubaŋa, 	For the grace of God has appeared that offers salvation to all people.
cik me cukul tek twatwal ma limme i kare mukene pe giye nyo kono i cabit otyeno keken 	the school rules are very strict that no visiting is allowed on any other day except on Sunday afternoon
nen bade ma ogogge kwedde 	look at his arm which is bent
gem nyim me mukene woko ka dong iteer 	take some of the simsim does not make sense 
taar wang pe ber 	lustfulness, looseness is not good 
pien pe abino ka ŋolo kop i kom lobo, ento abino ka laro lobo. 	“If anyone hears my words but does not keep them, I do not judge that person
roo i a gulu 	put into the pot 
Ka ce onoŋo ŋat mo mito timogi rac, ci mac bicorre i doggi waŋo lukworgi woko liweŋ	If anyone tries to harm them, fire comes from their mouths and devours their enemies
Ento ka tye lok mukene ma wumito, meno gibityekone i cokke me nino ducu macalo cik tye. 	If there is anything further you want to bring up, it must be settled in a legal assembly.
aleggi latin ni myerro kong iywee manok me cam ka lacen dong kink ka kwan 	I request you child that you should have a short time of rest for meals after which you return to study
lacen ka doŋ otyeko goyo Yecu ki del omiye woko ni gigure i kom yatariya. 	Then he released Barabbas to them
Utmegiwa, lok i kom dwogo pa Rwotwa Yecu Kricito ki cokkewa me rwatte kwede, wabako dogwa botwu ni, 	Concerning the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ and our being gathered to him, we ask you, brothers and sisters,
pe iyuu lemun 	do not pluck lemon
oregge odok piny, omiyo oloyo wanne 	he ducked down and that saved him from being hurt
lacir mada 	he has endured very much
aroma ma aneno i gang pa rwot pe bokke 	the suffering that I got from the chief's home cannot be talked about!
lwokke ki pii ma ngic nino ducu jiggo kom 	taking a cold bath every day invigorates the body
danone yuggo lok mada 	the man is very humourous in his talk 
korre tye ka rem mada, gengge tinggo jami mapek 	he is having much pain in his chest which is preventing her from carrying heavy things
Pi niye omiyo Cara onoŋo teko me yac, kadi bed mwaka me nywalle onoŋo doŋ okato woko. Man otimme pien en otamo ni, ŋat ma ociko-ni genne. 	And by faith even Sarah, who was past childbearing age, was enabled to bear children because she considered him faithful who had made the promise.
ruyo citto ka coo	hurrying to going to be married
yamo tye ka nallo yat 	the wind is blowing the tree slightly down 
um twerro beddo ma okongne nyo ma obab	the nose can be aquiline or flat 
obinno nono pe okello gin me 	he came with nothing
Wor mon ma coggi oto, ma doŋ gudoŋ kengi. 	older women as mothers, and younger women as sisters, with absolute purity.
kella gweni abiro	bring me seven chickens
lokke dong okarra woko, pe angeyo gin angoo ma atii 	I am in a dilemma, I do not know what to do
pien man aye remona me gicikke, ma oo pi jo mapol pi weko bal. 	This is my blood of the covenant, which is poured out for many for the forgiveness of sins.
Ka doŋ gucamo guyeŋ, ci doŋ guyako jami woko ki i mel kun gibolo ŋano woko i nam. 	When they had eaten as much as they wanted, they lightened the ship by throwing the grain into the sea.
Adada awacciwu ni, pe dok abimato pig olok, nio wa i kare ma abicako dok matone manyen wa i ker pa Lubaŋa.” 	“Truly I tell you, I will not drink again from the fruit of the vine until that day when I drink it new in the kingdom of God.”
ŋat ma waco ni ebedo i en myero olub kit kwo acel ma yam Yecu olubo. 	Whoever claims to live in him must live as Jesus did.
litino ducu gucitto ka pwonno pwomo 	all the children went to pick passion fruits 
kel laywee me laywee dye kal 	bring the broom for sweeping the compound of the house
Utmegiwa, ka ceŋ gipokowa woko kwedwu pi kare manok, i kom ento pe i cwiny, watemo twatwal ki miti madwoŋ me noŋo yo wek dok wanenne kwedwu waŋ ki waŋ. 	But, brothers and sisters, when we were orphaned by being separated from you for a short time (in person, not in thought), out of our intense longing we made every effort to see you.
nak lakke woke 	extract one of her normal tooth
lokke otwoyo dongwa woko 	the news silenced us, or we were silenced by the bad news
Man bibedo gin ma nyuto: wubinoŋo latin ma giumo ki boŋo, ma gipyele, obuto i weer pa dyaŋ.” 	This will be a sign to you: You will find a baby wrapped in cloths and lying in a manger.”
pien gin ma dano dworo, en aye gin me kwer i nyim Lubaŋa. 	He said to them, “You are the ones who justify yourselves in the eyes of others, but God knows your hearts
Lamalaika me abirone doŋ oonyo gin ma tye i atabone i dye yamo, ci dwan mo madit oa ki i ot pa Lubaŋa, ki i wi komker kun wacci, “Doŋ otimme!” 	The seventh angel poured out his bowl into the air, and out of the temple came a loud voice from the throne, saying, “It is done!”
nyampara pud peya odwoggo nia ma ocitto ka cam 	the headman has not yet retumed since he went for food
pe ijak bad Latin 	do not pull with a jerk the child's arm 
lok adaa ma alokkoni	it is the truth that I said
Nino madito me Mugati ma Tobi Pe Iye ma gilwoŋo Kato (Paska) onoŋo onyiko cok. 	Now the Festival of Unleavened Bread, called the Passover, was approaching,
guwaco ni, “Jon yam pe otiyo lanyut mo ento lok ducu ma Jon otito i kom dano man obedo me ada.” 	and many people came to him
bataniya me kare man dong obeddo cucu cucu 	the present blankets are velvety, not fine
teko kom ber mada 	body strength is very good 
obeddo ma kibworo, tyenne ma i kunyime ogollo ragi macoi, tungge tidi, mukwogo kong ongom odok igeye ka lacen ongom odok i nyimme	colour of the body is fawn or greyish brown and the forelegs have dark stripes, horns small and widely apart from each other and first have bent backwards and then at the tips they have bent forwards
meerro kongo onekko oddi pa dano mapol mada 	being drunk has destroyed many families
pien pi bedowu i Kricito omiyo doŋ wudoko lulonyo i yo ducu. Wutye bene doŋ ki ŋec ducu, dok wutwero doŋ lok maber, 	For in him you have been enriched in every way—with all kinds of speech and with all knowledge—
itwerro genne ki limmi 	you can trust him with your money 
pii matye ka cweer nia ki i paipo ma otuc mkido oo wa I ot 	the water from the leaking pipe does percolate up to the house
I kare ma Kerode doŋ oniaŋ ni luryeko gutimo ryeko i kome, akemo omake matek twatwal, ci ocwalo dano guneko litino co woko ducu ki i Beterekem kacel ki i kabedo ducu murumo kenyo, cakke ki i kom litino me mwaka aryo dok kwede piny, kun poro ki kare ma yam luryeko guniaŋe pire ca. 	When Herod realized that he had been outwitted by the Magi, he was furious, and he gave orders to kill all the boys in Bethlehem and its vicinity who were two years old and under, in accordance with the time he had learned from the Magi.
dekke mit mada  	the food is very good
min dyelle ber mada tiku gwarro rudi keken 	the goat is very good because it always gives birth to twins
Yecu openyo ni, “Yam pe gilonyo dano apar? Jo aboŋwen kono gitye kwene? 	Jesus asked, “Were not all ten cleansed? Where are the other nine?
Ka doŋ gukelo yeyagi i wi tera, guweko gipinygi ducu gulube. 	Then Jesus said to Simon, “Don’t be afraid; from now on you will fish for people.”
Ento Petero dok omedde ki dwoŋone, ka guyabo, ci guneno en, ci guuro. 	But Peter kept on knocking, and when they opened the door and saw him, they were astonished.
okwanynyo ki tek 	he took it by force
i kin gang 	among the village
ngom ma kany cekko cam mada 	the soil here makes the food grow well, or the soil here produces much food 
latin dong eok ka wee maber 	the child is now about to be fully grown up and can take care of himself
nying pak 	pet name, given to cattle, girls, and women in Bunyoro and Toro it is given to both male and female
pillo wii latin nyo wii dako 	spoiling by over indulging a child or the wife
Kwer lok mogo me miŋo ma tere pe ma pe me lworo Lubaŋa. Pwonnye keni i kwo me lworo Lubaŋa. 	If you point these things out to the brothers and sisters, you will be a good minister of Christ Jesus, nourished on the truths of the faith and of the good teaching that you have followed.
Lacen doŋ Lubaŋa bilaro jo Icrael ducu, 	After all, if you were cut out of an olive tree that is wild by nature, and contrary to nature were grafted into a cultivated olive tree, how much more readily will these, the natural branches, be grafted into their own olive tree!
bonggi arkii ducu welgi teggo 	all silk clothes are very expensive 
Yakobo ki Jon litino pa Jebedayo, ma gin yam ribbe ki Cimon i dog tic, bene guuro. Yecu owaco bot Cimon ni, “Pe ilwor	For he and all his companions were astonished at the catch of fish they had taken,
“In to, locci doŋ tye kwene? In to, aremmi kono tye kwene?” 	“Where, O death, is your victory? Where, O death, is your sting?”
Waraga man oa ki bot Paulo ma en lakwena pa Yecu Kricito pi mit pa Lubaŋa, ki bot ominwa Temceo. 	Tell Archippus: “See to it that you complete the ministry you have received in the Lord.”
ka oŋulo laa ci ogudo lebe	Then he spit and touched the man’s tongue.
Ento Luparicayo gukato woko ci guporo lok i kom Yecu, kit macalo myero gineke kwede. 	Then he said to the man, “Stretch out your hand.” So he stretched it out and it was completely restored, just as sound as the other.
Ci owacci, “Pi meno, jo ma i kinwu ma gitye ki twero myero gucit kweda. Ka onoŋo tye roc mo i kom laco meno, wek gudote bota.” 	Let some of your leaders come with me, and if the man has done anything wrong, they can press charges against him there.”
Ajwagi madito gucako dote ki lwak adot mapol. 	The chief priests accused him of many things.
maarro latinne mada	loves her child very much 
yenynyo tyen lok ma okello jemmo	to inquire into the cause of the strike
dogola gilorro lakucel keken	the door has been closed on one side only
joo Banyoro gin aye gukello gangi bot Acoli  	the Banyoro brought cowrie shells to the Acholi
pacce lyet twatwal twerro wanggo bongo woko  	the iron is too hot, it can burn the clothes
Lok man oŋene bot jo ducu ma gibedo i Jerucalem, ci poto meno gilwoŋo ki i lebgi ni Akel-dama, en aye Poto me Remo. 	Everyone in Jerusalem heard about this, so they called that field in their language Akeldama, that is, Field of Blood.)
Pi meno Yecu pe dok obedo ka wot ka maleŋ i kin Lujudaya, ento oa ki kunnu, ocito i lobo ma cok ki tim, i gaŋ ma gilwoŋo Epraim	So from that day on they plotted to take his life.
kwac o a o kany ki ngwec ma yibbe beddi twala twala 	the leopard passed here running with its long tail swinging side to sides
Dok gupenye ni, “Ka kumeno, piŋo Moses yam ociko ni gimi waraga me keto nyom, ki ryemo dako woko?” 	“Why then,” they asked, “did Moses command that a man give his wife a certificate of divorce and send her away?”
dano maarro ringo coo mada  	people like porcupine meat very much
ento giloyogi woko, mumiyo kabedo doŋ odoko pe pigi i wi polo. 	But he was not strong enough, and they lost their place in heaven.
acen aye jok	it is Acen who is jok
bim wii Latin maber 	flatten the hair on the child's head well
abembem tin gubinno ka legga	very important persons today came for prayers
jami ducu matye botte kuno twerro gamme 	all the things with him can be collected and brought back
Pien en paro pi wun ducu, kun mito ni enenwu, dok bene cwinye obedo ka cwer matek, pien yam wuwinyo onoŋo ni kome lit. 	But I think it is necessary to send back to you Epaphroditus, my brother, co-worker and fellow soldier, who is also your messenger, whom you sent to take care of my needs.
dano matek 	a strong man
weyo wii leela woko oyot oyot omiyo pe oyokko latin 	turning the bicycle away quickly made him to avoid knocking the child
tim gin ma imitto ikomma wek anen 	do to me what you like so that I may see it
tweyo dyel	to tie the goat 
jeg kwot me pyem 	deposit a shield for competition 
tye ka nyeddo lok tin mada	is talking too much arrogantly or sarcastically today 
ginywalle i dwee me Julai 	he was born in the month of July 
jeggo gin mo me ka warm 	pledging or depositing something for it
Koŋ wupo i kit ma wun wubedo kwede, wun ma wubedo Lurok i kit me anywalli. Lujudaya gilwoŋowu ni wun jo ma pe giliro, kun gilwoŋŋe kengi ni gin jo ma gulirre, pi lirregi ma ciŋ dano otiyo i riŋo komgi. 	not by works, so that no one can boast.
lacoc maber mada 	he is a good writer 
input ma nakanen oo kany? 	who arrived here earlier on?
putto gwana woko pe ber myerro ikwiny akwinya keken wek dok onywal mukene 	to uproot the cassava is not good, you should only take some of the roots but leave the tree there so that it may produce some more
opoorro ka odde laworo 	he made a plan for his house yesterday 
yenynyo buk me cura	to look for mathematic book
lapiru omukko wii ot school woko 	the whirlwind has blown off the root of the school building
Gin ducu giketo cwinygi i lok ma en waco, litino wa ludito bene, kun giwaco ni, “Man aye dano ma tye ki tek pa Lubaŋa ma gilwoŋo ni Madit-ti” 	and all the people, both high and low, gave him their attention and exclaimed, “This man is rightly called the Great Power of God.”
Ento a idony i gaŋ, ci gibititti gin ma myero iti.” 	“Now get up and go into the city, and you will be told what you must do.”
Yecu openyogi ni, “Cal ki coc ma gicoyo i kome-ni pa aŋa?” 	Show me the coin used for paying the tax.” They brought him a denarius,
Ka dok kany en bene oloko ni, “Gin pe bidonyo i yweyo bota.” 	And again in the passage above he says, “They shall never enter my rest.”
lok ajakka 	scornful or arrogant talk 
me tango mada ka dano ma ononggo dong buffo abutta ci gileggo i komme ci oa malo liwic ci owoto 	it is a miracle of wonders for a man who was all the time lying down in bed but when he was prayed for, he got up at once and walked
Ka doŋ owaco botgi ni, “Wucit i lobo ducu, wucitit iye lok me kwena maber bot ginaketa ducu. 	He said to them, “Go into all the world and preach the gospel to all creation.
ngido ringo me abulla 	cutting the meat for grilling
Pe gin keken, wan bene ma gimiyowa Cwiny Maleŋ macalo mot mukwoŋo, ma nyuto gin ma gibimiyowa i anyim, wan bene watye ka cur acura ki i iwa kun wakuro kare me lokowa wek wadok litino me paco, en aye me koko komwa. 	We know that the whole creation has been groaning as in the pains of childbirth right up to the present time.
teny dakoni 	abandon your wife or desert your wife
nywakko yoo ki ngati me 	going with somebody
pii pe myero omol lataya kany 	the water must not run continuously here
cittu wii tuur male ka wek wunen maber 	go up to the high ground so that you may see well
ka doŋ wuruk kit pa dano manyen ma giketo i cal pa Lubaŋa kikome i ada me kit ma atir ki maleŋ.	to be made new in the attitude of your minds;
Pe giwiyo uci, dok bene pe gicweyo boŋo	“And why do you worry about clothes? See how the flowers of the field grow
en ka bibino, bitittiwa lok ducu.” 	The woman said, “I know that Messiah” (called Christ) “is coming
geya me acamma kene pe mit ento ka girubbo manok nok ki kal ci dong gicammo 	sorghum itself is not nice for eating but if a small quantity of it is mixed with millet, then it is eaten
obuga donggo yadi mogo ma cengo cengo, nyigge bene tino mada makatto nyig kal, ento potte ka giteddo yom dok mit bene mada 	obuga plants which grow to very short height, have very tiny seeds smaller than those of millet, but their leaves when cooked, make very nice vegetables 
latin ma cammo yeng nen ki komme ma yot dok leng bene mada 	a child who eats well and full can be seen by his good health and well nourished body
rweny woko Ilmany 	lost completely to all knowledge
jo mapolle ducu ma gigoyo cal mabecco gin lucam, gigoyo ki cig acam	most of the great artists are left handed and draw or paint with left hand
ki dano ma tye i poto bene pe odok cen paco ka omo ginarukane. 	Let no one in the field go back to get their cloak.
iketto binika abuc mada i wii meja	you have put the tea pot in a precarious position on the table and it is about to fall down
Ka gucito i Epeco, ci oweko Pricikila ki Akwila kunnu	They arrived at Ephesus, where Paul left Priscilla and Aquila
dudde dok dit twatwal 	her buttocks are very big 
ceng con ononggo wacammo rec keken 	a long time ago we used to eat only fish
Cutcut Cwiny Maleŋ otero Yecu wa i tim wek Catan obite. 	Then Jesus was led by the Spirit into the wilderness to be tempted by the devil.
i kare meno jo ma tye i Judaya myero guriŋ woko i wi godi. 	then let those who are in Judea flee to the mountains.
Gutemo make, ento gulworo lwak, pien lwak onoŋo ŋeyo ni en lanebi.	When the chief priests and the Pharisees heard Jesus’ parables, they knew he was talking about them.
dano ma pud peya onyommo pud latin myerro pe beddo i kin luditto 	a man who is not yet married is a child, he should not stay with the elders or be among the elders
dakone komme mit mada, wille awilla ka tic	the woman is very active, she works with speed and agility 
Cwinywu opoŋ ki kumu pien atittiwu lok man. 	They will do such things because they have not known the Father or me.
wek abil	let me taste
en obeddo nama acel	he was the first
jig baddi keg wek wanen ka tek 	tightening your arm so as to make us see if it is very strong 
yat ka opotto ogoyo tyen latin ci nyocco cogo tyenne woko 	if a tree fell and struck a child's leg, it will cause a green stick fracture of his bones
Wonne ki minne guuro lok ma giwaco i kome. 	The child’s father and mother marveled at what was said about him.
ngollo ringo ni cuku cuku 	cutting the meat with the blunt knife
gujollo wiye ki yom cwiny mada 	they welcomed him with great happiness 
jub kal, matye woko i dyekal ikel i ot, pien dyel koni cammo woko 	collect the millet from outside the compound and bring it into the house because the goats will eat it
Ci Cimon odok iye ni, “Wuleg Rwot pira wek gin ma wuwaconi pe opot i koma.” 	Then Simon answered, “Pray to the Lord for me so that nothing you have said may happen to me.”
miyo lim ki dano ma ticce dong mitto polo woko me konynye wek pe opotti 	giving some money to somebody whose business is failing to prop him up to prevent him from failing
Dok awinyo keno tyer ka daŋŋe ni, “Ada, Rwot Lubaŋa Won Twer Ducu, kop ducu ma iŋolo bedo ada dok atir!” 	And I heard the altar respond: “Yes, Lord God Almighty, true and just are your judgments.”
Gin ma miyo waŋeyo ni wabedo i iye, ki en i iwa, pien omiyowa Cwiny mere. 	This is how we know that we live in him and he in us: He has given us of his Spirit.
twoo ma pat pat kello ngok 	various diseases cause vomiting
Pien dano bibedo ka maro komgi kengi kun gibedo lumar lim, luwakke, lucac, lunywar jo mukene. Pe gibiwinyo lunyodogi, pe gibimiyo pwoc mo, gibibedo jo ma pe leŋ. 	But mark this: There will be terrible times in the last days.
caak ka giwekko mape gimurro ci polio woko 	when milk is left unboiled, it curdles
ci owacce ni, “Luba.” 	After this, Jesus went out and saw a tax collector by the name of Levi sitting at his tax booth
twoo aniino ka omakko dano ci miyo dano beddo ka ninno aninna 	when sleeping sickness has affected a person, it makes him to sleep most of the times 
lok dong pol kany twatwal 	there are too many problems here 
I oboke yat ma i pittoni obokke woko	the leaves of the tree which you have planted have become brown
gitye ka pwoddo owiny lukwoo mada ki anino	the thieves' buttocks are being beaten thoroughly with hippopotamus hide 
jalle olokko ma kwok dong jibbo ajibba i wangge 	the fellow spoke so much with beads of sweat coming out on his face 
odyer dong gityeko genggo ne woko, nen dong gicel gicel keken 	small pox has now been prevented, it occurs occasionally
Ada, atittiwu ni, i nino me ŋolo kop can pa Codom ki Gomora bibedo tworatwora, ento can ma gibikelo i kom gaŋ meno doŋ bikato. 	Truly I tell you, it will be more bearable for Sodom and Gomorrah on the day of judgment than for that town.
gin marac mape larre 	a very bad thing indeed 
lakob dong me lok Acoli tye i ot kwica 	an interpreter of Acholi language is there in the house
gony ogwil woko ki gut dyel pien tyek deyone 	undo the rope from the goat's neck because it is strangling it 
wic ma acuru nen marac mada ka dong gilyello	an oval shaped head looks very ugly when it is shaved
ngat ma petto piny twatwal nying ma gimiine en aye Apetti 	one who is always roaming about is given a name of Apetti
obwollo laremme owekko opotto i bal	he deceived his friend and made him fall into trouble
lac atata ma pe tye kabeddone i gang pe ber  	passing urine all over the place in a home without a place for it is not good
En pe oloko lok meno piwa? I adane lokke yam gicoyo piwa, pien lapur myero opur pur kun noŋo tye ki gen, ŋat ma dino bel bene myero odin kun tye ki gen me noŋo dul mo iye. 	Surely he says this for us, doesn’t he? Yes, this was written for us, because whoever plows and threshes should be able to do so in the hope of sharing in the harvest.
wun wuŋak wurwenyo woko marac.” 	You are badly mistaken!”
cogi mon 	very big women 
en doŋ dit, en bilok pire kene.” 	Ask him
jalmo tye ka gwerro goba kuno mape wacce 	somebody is telling a lot of lies there 
ket ki tengge 	put it aside
Ento pi tek cwinyi, en cwinyi ma idag ŋut kwede-ni, meno itye ka kano giri mono me akemo pa Lubaŋa piri keni pi kuro nino me akemo, en kare ma gibinyuto iye ŋolo kop ma atir pa Lubaŋa. 	Or do you show contempt for the riches of his kindness, forbearance and patience, not realizing that God’s kindness is intended to lead you to repentance?
Ka Petero onenogi, ci owaco bot lwak ni, “Wun jo Icrael wuuro lok man piŋo? Piŋo wuciko waŋwu i komwa macalo wan aye ma watimo lok man ki tekwa, nyo ni pien wan jo ma lworo Lubaŋa omiyo dano-ni owoto? 	When Peter saw this, he said to them: “Fellow Israelites, why does this surprise you? Why do you stare at us as if by our own power or godliness we had made this man walk?
Orwone dyewor, Rwot ocuŋ ka ŋet Paulo, owacce ni, “Di cwinyi. Macalo ibedo ka tito lok i koma i Jerucalem, kit meno bene myero ibed cadenna bene wa i Roma.” 	The following night the Lord stood near Paul and said, “Take courage! As you have testified about me in Jerusalem, so you must also testify in Rome.”
wel me cati man adii? 	what is the cost ot this shirt? 
cati yamo obayo ogem woko i wii yat 	the the shirt was blown by the wind and got caught up on the branches of the tree and remained there
Atye ka loko lok man i kit pa dano keken? Cik kono pe loko lok ma rom ki man? 	Do I say this merely on human authority? Doesn’t the Law say the same thing?
Jo ma bedo i lobo biŋatte i komgi, gibibedo ki yomcwiny kun gicwalo mot i kingi kekengi, pien lutit lok aryo-nu onoŋo yam guuno dano ma bedo i lobo matek. 	The inhabitants of the earth will gloat over them and will celebrate by sending each other gifts, because these two prophets had tormented those who live on the earth.
lapwopwo gitye ka tuk ni piri piri 	the butterflies are flying all around
ngabbo bongo i wii tol 	hanging the clothes on the line 
yonne pa gut ginywallo ki dano anywalla 	a person is born with a long neck, in other words, long neck is inherited,
tiyu balo akeyo	old age ruins akeyo
Lupuraga gitye ka yerre ken gi me tic 	the people ot Puraga are selecting themselves for work
carok acel acel ducu matye kany myerro obin ka coyo nyigge i buk ka wek gigee kama en beddo iye 	every foreigner who is here, must come for registration so that the place where he stays is known
Ŋat acel i kin opii pa ajwaka madit, wat pa dano ma Petero oŋuno ite-ni, openye ni, “Nanen pe aneni kacel kwede i poto?” 	Then Annas sent him bound to Caiaphas the high priest.
Lujudaya guwacce ni, “Ot pa Lubaŋa man gigero pi mwaka pyeraŋwen wiye abicel kulu. In ibigerone pi nino adek keken?” 	Jesus answered them, “Destroy this temple, and I will raise it again in three days.”
Jo aryo mukene bene, ma lutim maraco, giterogi wek ginekgi kacel kwede. 	Two other men, both criminals, were also led out with him to be executed.
cibbo wii meja 	putting down on the ground 
ryammo ayita oran ki yoo	chasing the squirrel stopped half way
Wacoyo lok man wek yomcwinywa ocobbe maber. 	We write this to make our joy complete.
nyampara me tic meewu tye kwene? 	where is your headman for the work? 
pien an akwo, wun bene wubikwo. 	Before long, the world will not see me anymore, but you will see me
binika matkidi gitiyo iye cai 	the small kettle is where tea is put, the big kettle is for boiling water
dong candukke twerro cengge	a short person is very troublesome 
Ocako tiŋogi i kore omiyogi gum, kun keto ciŋe i komgi. 	And he took the children in his arms, placed his hands on them and blessed them.
yokko wic ki tee luduku 	butting the head with the butt of the gun
gumako lukwena guketogi i mabuc. 	They arrested the apostles and put them in the public jail.
can yen maber 	pile the firewood on top of one another 
gupillo wii awobe ma guloyo mupira ki kijira 	they welcomed the boys who were victorious in the football match with ululation of joy
Ka doŋ gilwoŋe, Tertulo ocako adotte kun waco ni, “Laloyo Maber, ladit Pelici, wabedo ki kuc piri nia wa con, dok itamo pi rokwa, ikelo alokaloka mapol ma okonyowa 	When Paul was called in, Tertullus presented his case before Felix: “We have enjoyed a long period of peace under you, and your foresight has brought about reforms in this nation.
Petero owaco ni, “Nen, wan waweko pacciwa, walubi.” 	Peter said to him, “We have left all we had to follow you!”
jwaa lakki 	brush your teeth 
pe gunoŋo kome	The chief priests and our rulers handed him over to be sentenced to death, and they crucified him;
yik pa ladit bibeddo diki	the big man's burial will be tomorrow 
latin man dok maarro Iweny twawal kadi i gin mo ma teere pe 	this child loves very much to fight even for things which have no meaning 
Kabaka Kerode owinyo pire, pien onoŋo nyiŋ Yecu doŋ oywek twatwal. Jo mogo guwaco ni, “Jon Labatija aye ocer woko ki i kin jo muto	King Herod heard about this, for Jesus’ name had become well known
Yecu oa woko ki kunnu, ci obino wa i lobo Judaya ma loka Jordan, ci lwak dok gucokke bote	Jesus then left that place and went into the region of Judea and across the Jordan
jalle nywenne twatwal koni miyo waoo lacen 	the fellow delays too much, he might make us to be late 
anyogi pudi tocco pe ya rommo meaturra 	the maize is not yet fully developed and grown and not yet ready for harvesting
pirro nyim pong dero 	to fill filling the granary with simsim up to its brim 
Kit ma en odonyo kwede i ot pa Lubaŋa, ci ocamo mugati ma giketo i nyim Lubaŋa, ma yam cik ogeŋo ni en pe ocam, kadi ki jo ma onoŋo gitye kacel kwede, ento kono ajwagi pa Lubaŋa keken?. 	He answered, “Haven’t you read what David did when he and his companions were hungry?
Ento nyig ma nyak pi Cwiny Maleŋ gin aye mar, yomcwiny, kuc, diyo cwiny, kica, ber, gen, 	idolatry and witchcraft; hatred, discord, jealousy, fits of rage, selfish ambition, dissensions, factions
oturro emme woko oweko dong wotto ni nyak nyak 	he broke his thigh bone that is why he limps when walking
Man otimme wek lok ma yam lanebi Icaya oloko ocobbe kakare, ni, 	He warned them not to tell others about him.
Litinona, acoyo waraga man botwu wek pe wupot i bal	My dear children, I write this to you so that you will not sin
cweerro yer woko ki i kom laa 	scraping off hairs from the skin or hide  
opotto ni lwany  	he fell heavily on its full length
man aye kabeddo kama cam pwodde iye ata 	this is the place where food is in plenty 
mac onogo peke me teddo ci gupiyo yat ci mac obinno cut 	there was no fire for cooking and therefore they drilled the wood and fire came
lapidi en aye dano ma gwoko litino maber dok bene lwokko komgi ki bonggigi maleng 	a child's maid is a person who looks after the the children very well, washes their bodies and clothes clean
Pe tye ŋat mo i kingi ma odwogo cen ka pako Lubaŋa, ento kono larok man keken?” 	Has no one returned to give praise to God except this foreigner?”
tye ka lurro pii ki dano me loggo cinggi 	he is pouring water for the people to wash their hands
bonyo tye ka tuk ni piri piri 	the locusts are flying all over around 
Bal mo pe ma en otimo, doge bene pe oloko lok goba. 	But how is it to your credit if you receive a beating for doing wrong and endure it? But if you suffer for doing good and you endure it, this is commendable before God.
Gabuna me Uganda ocitto ka nenno joo me poto ceng  	the Governor of Uganda has gone for inspection of the Western region
bura opotto ibur abuno	the cat has fallen into the deep round hole
adwek nyette anyetta ka giwotto pien bwomgi pud peke	adwek move about by hopping because they have no wings
Gin ma yam ber ca aye dok okelo to i koma? Pe kumeno! Bal aye onoŋo mumiyo ato, kun tiyo ki gin maber, wek omi onen woko ka maleŋ ni meno bal ennu. Kit meno gin ma giciko ca omiyo bal odoko marac mukato kare. 	So then, the law is holy, and the commandment is holy, righteous and good.
gitye ka pimmo remone ki maikorocikop me nenno ka kwkii maleriya tye iye 	they are examining his blood under a microscope to find out whether there is malarial parasites 
leggo ni Orac en aye ma okwallo kwoo, kun en pe okwallo 	to impute or to say saying that Orac was the one who stole something and yet he did not
lageddo ot mabecco tye Gulu	a good builder is in Gulu
Rwot bene yam ociko i kit yo acel-lu ni, jo ma tito lok me kwena maber myero gunoŋ gin ma gikwo kwede pi tito lok me kwena maber-ri. 	In the same way, the Lord has commanded that those who preach the gospel should receive their living from the gospel.
Ento kadi bed wan, nyo lamalaika mo mua ki i polo, otittiwu lok me kwena maber mapat ki lok ma nene watito botwu-ni myero gicen woko. 	I am astonished that you are so quickly deserting the one who called you to live in the grace of Christ and are turning to a different gospel—
ngat acel acel myerro okel cilling adek	every one must bring three shillings
Medo i kom meno, gilokke gidoko luwackom ma gibibedo ka wot awota i ot ki ot	Thus they bring judgment on themselves, because they have broken their first pledge.
pi ticgi maditto joo meno pe twerro lwongge me binno i kacokke macallo man 	the important people like that cannot be invited to a meeting like this
ka imitti gudaa ci rut lok i kingi 	if you want them to quarrel, instigate them 
Makato ducu, niye aye myero obed kwotwu ma bimiyo wutwero neko mac ki i kom atero ma Larac bayo. 	and with your feet fitted with the readiness that comes from the gospel of peace.
Ci odolo buk, odwoko bot latic, obedo piny ka tito lok	Then he rolled up the scroll, gave it back to the attendant and sat down
ogoyo latin marac mada 	he beat the child very badly 
twoo owiggo wil latin woko omiyo origgo woko i lum 	the child's mind was deranged by the illness that made him ran to the jungle 
yang i kare macon dano ononggo gimaarro kwoyo pali ma pyergi lac ci ka girukko pall meno ci gilyerro alyerra i pal gwokgi ki kaba, pe gitweyo dong pyer paligi ki del 	in the past people used to make pair of their trousers with a wide opening at the waists and when they are wearing them, they suspend them over their shoulders with suspenders and they do not tie their waists with Leather belts 
Nen, tye dako mo ma labalo i gaŋ meno. Ka oŋeyo ni Yecu tye ka cam i ot pa Laparicayo, ci okelo adomo moo ma ŋwece kur. 	A woman in that town who lived a sinful life learned that Jesus was eating at the Pharisee’s house, so she came there with an alabaster jar of perfume.
parro mada gin angoo ma myero etim 	meditating very much as to what he should do
Ka wun yam doŋ wuto woko kacel ki Kricito, ka doŋ gigonyowu woko ki i te loc pa jogi macon me wi lobo, piŋo pud dok wumedde ki bedo calo jo me lobo, kun wugwoko bene cik macalo magi, 	They have lost connection with the head, from whom the whole body, supported and held together by its ligaments and sinews, grows as God causes it to grow.
bot tyen dano tye i igee ot myerro gatti mo owok kany 	there are foot marks of people behind the house, somebody must have passed here 
Pien gin ma dano twero ŋeyone i kom Lubaŋa doŋ onen woko ka maleŋ botgi, Lubaŋa doŋ onyuto botgi. 	The wrath of God is being revealed from heaven against all the godlessness and wickedness of people, who suppress the truth by their wickedness,
nyuka ka okwee ci licce woko	when the gruel becomes cold it becomes watery
awobe cittu wunu ka gerro dyekal 	the boys go to dig and clean away the compound
Pi meno, wun ma amaro, macalo yam wuwinyo lokka i kare ducu ma onoŋo pud atye botwu, myero wubed ki winy makato kare kombeddi ma doŋ atye bor kwedwu-ni. Wuti tic me cobo larwu kenwu kenwu ki lworo kacel ki myelkom, 	that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, in heaven and on earth and under the earth,
en ngeyo panno buk me lok ma pigi tek 	he knows how to hkie away books of classified matters 
Adada awacciwu ni, dano ma pe oye ker pa Lubaŋa macalo latin, pe bidonyo i kerre kadi matidi mo.” 	Truly I tell you, anyone who will not receive the kingdom of God like a little child will never enter it.”
Pe ginoŋo ni atye ka pyem ki dano mo, nyo tubo lwak, kadi i ot pa Lubaŋa, nyo i kacokke me lega, nyo i dye gaŋ. 	My accusers did not find me arguing with anyone at the temple, or stirring up a crowd in the synagogues or anywhere else in the city.
Luyudaya bene guribbe i adot meno, kun gimoko ni lok man ducu tye kit meno. 	The other Jews joined in the accusation, asserting that these things were true.
Pien Wod pa dano aye Rwot me cabit.” 	If you had known what these words mean, ‘I desire mercy, not sacrifice,’ you would not have condemned the innocent.
Pien onoŋo guneno Tropimo ma Laepeco ma gitye kacel kwede i gaŋ, ci gutamo ni Paulo okele i ot pa Lubaŋa. 	(They had previously seen Trophimus the Ephesian in the city with Paul and assumed that Paul had brought him into the temple.)
gwokke ka itye ka nyetto cak pi ngwec pa dyang 	when milking a cow watch out for a kick by the cow 
igaya ki tee wanggi pinngoo? 	why do you look at me from the corner of your eyes?
pe wuca bene lok ma Lubaŋa miyo bot dano me atita, 	Do not treat prophecies with contempt
wotto ni tara tara ki waar tyenne 	she walks with boastful display of her shoes which are knocking the ground
jeg leela i kom ot 	lean the bicycle against the house
tyekko lok me pido ne i kot awene? 	is he finishing his case in the court?
lung dong agulu piny 	turn the mouth of the pot down 
en tye ki gec mada me yubo cawa 	he has much knowledge in repairing of watches 
kel caden mean oyot oyot 	bring your witness quickly 
Ka doŋ oniaŋ, ci ocito i ot pa Maliam min Jon ma nyiŋe mukene Marako, ka ma jo mapol gucokke gugurre iye, ma gitye ka lega. 	When this had dawned on him, he went to the house of Mary the mother of John, also called Mark, where many people had gathered and were praying.
goggo wangge ki wang dirica ci nenno gin ma timme woko 	this is my land
Ka doŋ oteggi, ci odoko ŋat ma kelo larre ma pe tum bot dano ducu ma winyo en,	and, once made perfect, he became the source of eternal salvation for all who obey him
Ento ka dano mo cwinye tek kun pe tye gin mo ma diye, ma doŋ bene noŋo otyeko mine me weko nyako-nu ma pe ginyomme, noŋo otimo ber ka ce twero loyo tamme. 	But the man who has settled the matter in his own mind, who is under no compulsion but has control over his own will, and who has made up his mind not to marry the virgin—this man also does the right thing.
oneno Yecu kun woto, owaco ni, “Nen Latin-romo pa Lubaŋa!” 	The next day John was there again with two of his disciples.
ngullo laa atata kit mane 	spitting saliva anywhere 
An kikoma abinyutte can madwoŋ ma en myero ocir pi nyiŋa.” 	I will show him how much he must suffer for my name.”
latek keng wii ogwang mutwo 	one who is disobedient will not get a dried head of a fox, that is, he will miss some of the things that he might find there where he has been sent
mon tin gudaa ma gulamme mape wacce 	the women quarrelled today and cursed one another very much 
ma myero gijole i polo nio ka kare oromo me dwoko jami ducu kakare, ma yam Lubaŋa oloko pire i dog lunebine maleŋ nia wa con. 	Heaven must receive him until the time comes for God to restore everything, as he promised long ago through his holy prophets.
gitye ka patto kom ot ki lobo 	they are building the house by throwing the mud or clay 
ki en bene ocako yenyo kare maber ma eromo miyo ki Yecu i ciŋgi. 	So he watched for an opportunity to hand him over.
opam man pud nyen dinno kal maber mada 	the short block of wood is still very new it threshes the millet very well 
wukwoŋo tamo pi dano ma oruko boŋŋi mabeco-ni, kun wuwaco ni, “Bed kany, ladit,” ento bot lacan wuwacce ni, “Cuŋ kuca,” nyo ni, “Bed piny ka tyena kany.” 	If you show special attention to the man wearing fine clothes and say, “Here’s a good seat for you,” but say to the poor man, “You stand there” or “Sit on the floor by my feet,”
lekko dyangi pe gin ma yot pien myerro ibed kwede pi kare ducu wek pe guket ata 	to herd the cattle is not an easy thing because you must be with them all the time in order to prevent them from scattering 
weddo lok 	speaking carelessly or thoughtlessly
ywaa twon yen man i teer kwica 	drag this big log of wood and take it there 
Ka dok oo wa i Derube ki Licitra, lapwonnye mo onoŋo tye kunnu ma nyiŋe Temceo, wod pa dako mo ma Lajudaya ma oye Kricito, ento wonne aye Lagrik. 	Paul came to Derbe and then to Lystra, where a disciple named Timothy lived, whose mother was Jewish and a believer but whose father was a Greek.
lak matar en aye gwee 	the white teeth are the ones that smell
Cimon Petero ogamo doge ni, “Rwot, wabicito bot aŋa? In itye ki lok me kwo ma pe tum. 	“You do not want to leave too, do you?” Jesus asked the Twelve.
ogikko lok mere kit menu 	he ended his statement like that
“Pi meno ker me polo gitwero poro ki kabaka mo ma onoŋo yam omito yubo lok me banya ki luticce. 	“Therefore, the kingdom of heaven is like a king who wanted to settle accounts with his servants.
Ka Yecu otiŋo waŋe, oneno lwak madwoŋ kun bino bote, openyo Pilipo ni, “Wabiwilo kwon kwene wek jo man ocam?” 	The Jewish Passover Festival was near.
ki ŋati ma mito bedo mukwoŋo i kinwu, en aye myero obed opiiwu ducu. 	and whoever wants to be first must be slave of all.
Ci malaika acel ki i kin lumalaika abiro ma onoŋo gitye ki atabo abiro ma gemo abiro me agikki tye i igi ca, obino oloko bota kun wacci, “Bin, anyutti Nyako ger, dako pa Latin romo.” 	One of the seven angels who had the seven bowls full of the seven last plagues came and said to me, “Come, I will show you the bride, the wife of the Lamb.”
pi onyog nyog ma onekko komme woko omiyo pe dong otukko tukko me dongge 	because of panic, he did not take part in the boxing competition 
kadi beddi lawotte otimme maber ento pud tuuro yat i gwiny lawotte 	even though his friend treated him well, he still showed his ungratefulness by slandering him 
coo janynyo okuto komme 	the porcupine makes its quills stick out 
Ento watye ki lonyo man i atabo ma gicweyo ki lobo, me nyuto ni tek madwoŋ me twero obedo gire pa Lubaŋa, pe oa ki botwa. 	For God, who said, “Let light shine out of darkness,” made his light shine in our hearts to give us the light of the knowledge of God’s glory displayed in the face of Christ.
kommi gum mada ka commo i komwa ma watye ka cam 	you are very lucky to come unexpectedly upon us when eating
ento kadi bed ocikogi kumeno, gin bene gumedde ameda ki tito pire. 	But the more he did so, the more they kept talking about it.
Gwok nyo man en gin mumiyo en yam opokke woko kwedi pi kare manok, ni wek doŋ igame matwal, 	But I did not want to do anything without your consent, so that any favor you do would not seem forced but would be voluntary.
Jon ogamo ni, “Ladit, waneno ŋat mo ma ryemo cen i nyiŋi, wageŋe, pien en onoŋo pe lubi kacel kwedwa.” 	“Master,” said John, “we saw someone driving out demons in your name and we tried to stop him, because he is not one of us.”
mon Indi aye gimaarro mada rukko luyolo i gutgi	the Indian women love very much to wear necklaces of bright beads of various kinds
ka idag gin mo pe konynyo me jakko lok ajaka iye, wac atir ni adaggi 	if you don't like anything do not speak haughtily about it, simply say I do not want it
ryammo aita oran ki yoo 	chasing the squirrel stopped half way
teer cukuleke magi ilwokgi 	take these pants and wash them
ento ki bot jo ma pe guye en, tye macalo yam gicoyo ni, “Got ma lugedo gukwero, en aye odoko got madit me twok ot.” 	Now to you who believe, this stone is precious
latin put nino ducu beddo ma onweng pien cam nonggo pe rommo 	a malnourished child is always emaciated 
oteerro jo mukene ento ogoyowa woko 	he took some other people but he left us behind 
wangge lik	he looks awkward and serious
Onoŋo tye Lujudaya ma gibedo i Jerucalem, jo ma giworo Lubaŋa ma gua i rok ducu ma tye i wi lobo. 	Now there were staying in Jerusalem God-fearing Jews from every nation under heaven.
wun jo me lobo, an pe a dano me lobo. 	But he continued, “You are from below; I am from above
leg lawotti wek omii cukari manok 	ask your friend to give you some sugar 
Ka lupwonnye pa Jon guwinyo pire, gucito gutiŋo kome, guyiko i lyel. 	On hearing of this, John’s disciples came and took his body and laid it in a tomb.
luurro kal pe gin ma yot 	threshing the millet is not an easy job, work 
I en con tye kwo, kwo meno con ceŋ pa dano. 	Through him all things were made; without him nothing was made that has been made.
“Lokgi ducu ma giloko obedo lok makec ma giceno ki dano acena.” 	“Their throats are open graves; their tongues practice deceit.” “The poison of vipers is on their lips.”
tir yoo man wek ocungatir 	straighten this way
gwarro wang dano 	scratching a someone's face 
amitto tic me paipo ma gitye ka ketto me pii i oda myerro dong otum i Dino me baraja 	I want the work for the pipes that are being laid in my house for water, to be finished by Monday
Dok bene pe wulwoŋ dano mo ni wonwu i wi lobo, pien Wonwu tye acel, en aye ŋat ma tye i polo. 	“But you are not to be called ‘Rabbi,’ for you have one Teacher, and you are all brothers.
litino ducu gucitto ka pwonno pwomo 	all the children went to pick passion fruits 
en gakko kal agakka 	she does not know how to grind millet, she grinds it badly
Yecu owaccigi ni, “Karena pud peya oo, ento karewu nino ducu tye. 	For even his own brothers did not believe in him.
wang burre tye ka cweer remo	his sore is bleeding
tye ka wirro yat moni wek komme obokke woko	he is smearing his body with a certain medicine so that his body may become brown 
Ka dano mo kwoŋo kwoŋ ci kwoŋo ki nyiŋ ŋat madit loye, dok ka pyem mo tye i kin dano, lok ma gimoko ki kwoŋ aye ma tyeko pyem meno. 	People swear by someone greater than themselves, and the oath confirms what is said and puts an end to all argument.
in itye ka cwakko dano ma lakwoo ni? 	are you defending the thief? 
tin gumakko rec madowong mada ki ogwaa ma pud gicweyo manyen 	today they caught a lot of fishes with their newly woven ogwaa
dano ma aduno ne kec	a person who has a bitter heart 
Yam onoŋo tye laco mo i Cecaria ma nyiŋe Kornelio, ladit me dul askari ma gilwoŋo ni me Itali, 	At Caesarea there was a man named Cornelius, a centurion in what was known as the Italian Regiment.
litino ma tino maarro tung mada ka gitye ka cam 	young children tend to get frequent attacks of suffocation when eating
I kare ma onoŋo Petero tye piny i dyekal, ci aŋeca pa ajwaka madit acel mo obino kenyo. 	While Peter was below in the courtyard, one of the servant girls of the high priest came by.
pwod pa Lubanga 	God's punishment 
Pien Adam aye ma gikwoŋo cweyone, ka doŋ lacen gicweyo Kawa. 	A woman should learn in quietness and full submission.
twoo wig go wii dano	disease does derange a man's mind 
Waŋ pe twero waco ki ciŋ ni, “An pe amiti.” Wic pe twero waco ki tyen ni, “An gira pe amitowu.” 	The eye cannot say to the hand, “I don’t need you!” And the head cannot say to the feet, “I don’t need you!”
Mumiyo lwak guuro twatwal ka guneno lutelebgi oto guloko, jo ma ciŋgi okwe gucaŋ, jo ma tyengi oŋol guwoto, kadi wa lutowaŋ bene guneno piny	Great crowds came to him, bringing the lame, the blind, the crippled, the mute and many others, and laid them at his feet; and he healed them.
“Doŋ ka wubineno gin mo me kwer, malik, ma balo cwiny dano, ma yam Daniel otito pire, kun ocuŋ i kabedo maleŋ (dano ma kwano myero oniaŋ iye), 	“So when you see standing in the holy place ‘the abomination that causes desolation,’ spoken of through the prophet Daniel—let the reader understand—
Guloko lok mukene mapol i kome, kun giyete. 	And they said many other insulting things to him.
ton yat i wangge 	drop medicine in his eyes
Onoŋo nene wucako riŋo ŋwec maber	The only thing that counts is faith expressing itself through love.
Cakke i kare meno, lupwonnyene mapol gudok cen, pe dok gubedo ka wot kacel kwede. 	He went on to say, “This is why I told you that no one can come to me unless the Father has enabled them.”
cwakko mac i tee agulu 	to poke fire under the cooking pot
Man aye cik madit dok mukwoŋo. 	Jesus replied: “‘Love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your mind.’
en pe ngeyo timmo gin moo 	he does not know how to do anything
awobe gitye ka royo duo me amwodda pa ludito 	the boys are broiling the meat for the elders to eat
motoka opotto i kulu ma opong ki daba ci dano gukati woko ki i kulu ma bogigi ducu opong ki daba ma beddi joto joto 	the car fell into the muddy river and people came out of the river with their clothes completely covered with mud
ticce mere me cwec keken 	her work is to make something all the time
tye ka lubbo kor dyang meere pien gurweny woko 	he is following the tracks of his cattle because they are lost
Mumiyo kadi bed acoyo botwu waraga, pe acoyo pi ŋat ma otimo gin marac, kadi pi ŋat ma gitimo gin marac i kome, ento acoyo wek omi kit ma wularo kwede pira onen woko ka maleŋ botwu i nyim Lubaŋa. 	But God, who comforts the downcast, comforted us by the coming of Titus,
timmo ling ling 	does it quietly 
Mumiyo wamoko tamwa ni dano gikwano ni kite atir pi niyene, ento pe pi tic me cobo cik. 	he did it to demonstrate his righteousness at the present time, so as to be just and the one who justifies those who have faith in Jesus.
gwokke pe icel wii lawotti ki lakkii 	be careful do not hit your friend's head with a stone 
Deyo obed bote nakanaka i Kricito Yecu ki i lwak jo ducu muye en, i kare pa yalwak ducu. Amen.	Now to him who is able to do immeasurably more than all we ask or imagine, according to his power that is at work within us,
lok ma kitmeno myerro ilokko ki tengge pe ki botwa kany 	such kind of talks you should take it away not bring to us here
Abraim yam oye, kun onoŋo oketo genne i kom gin ma nen calo pe gitwero geno, omiyo en odoko kwaro rok mapol, kit macalo yam gicoyo ni, “Likwayu bibedo kit meno.” 	As it is written: “I have made you a father of many nations.” He is our father in the sight of God, in whom he believed—the God who gives life to the dead and calls into being things that were not.
Pe onoŋo aloko i kom dano me lobo-ni ma gitimo tim kwele, nyo luworo me jami, ki luyak, nyo jo ma woro cal jogi. Pe kumeno	not at all meaning the people of this world who are immoral, or the greedy and swindlers, or idolaters
kom agulu pii tye ka motto pii mada 	the water pot is now oozing a lot of water  
jotto dong ki moo, to smear  	smearing the mouth with the oil
tyangge owaca, layatane iye owaca 	the sugarcane is spongy, it has no juice and is not sweetthe sweet potatoes are spongy
litino guraddo cet kany 	the children defaecated all over here
en myero omiwu gin ducu mabeco ma mitte, wek wuti wucob gin ma en mito	equip you with everything good for doing his will, and may he work in us what is pleasing to him, through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever and ever
dwee tin pe tye ka nen maber 	the moon today is not clearly visible
Atye ki gen i Rwot ni, tamwu pe bipokke ki mera	“A little yeast works through the whole batch of dough.”
ngwec me lweny dong oromogi woko 	they are tired of running from war danger 
Okot jogge twatwal 	Okot always delays 
ento yam gijuke pi turo cik. Kana ma pe loko yam oloko ki dwan pa dano, ci ojuko apoya pa lanebi meno woko cut. 	But he was rebuked for his wrongdoing by a donkey—an animal without speech—who spoke with a human voice and restrained the prophet’s madness.
Ka doŋ okatti macalo dano, omwolle woko gire kene, obedo lawiny nio wa i to, nio bene wa i to i kom yatariya. 	rather, he made himself nothing by taking the very nature of a servant, being made in human likeness.
Man en kwon ma lor piny nia i polo, ma ka dano mo ocamo, pe bito. 	Your ancestors ate the manna in the wilderness, yet they died.
citto ka rweene i cuk  	going for a walk to the market
Ento awacciwu ni, wuye Cwiny Maleŋ pa Lubaŋa aye otelwu, wek pe wucob miti me kit pa dano. 	If you bite and devour each other, watch out or you will be destroyed by each other.
okelo wiye i weer, omiyo bot nyako	and brought back his head on a platter
Jo ma kit meno gin aye lukel apokapoka, gin jo me lobo man, Cwiny pa Lubaŋa pe botgi. 	They said to you, “In the last times there will be scoffers who will follow their own ungodly desires.”
Watye ki gen madwoŋ pi Cwiny Maleŋ me noŋo kit ma atir ma gimiyo pi niye. 	Again I declare to every man who lets himself be circumcised that he is obligated to obey the whole law.
panne dong apanna ki dano 	he hides himself from the people
cing acel pe kweko ngwiny	one hand alone cannot open the vagina
man dong dako ma lak ata ki coo 	this is a woman who goes with any man, in other words, she is a prostitute
pwoyo tic ma en otiyo 	thanking for the good work that he did
nyebbe ka beddo ki joo ma piny cen mo bibolli i pekko	to familiarise yourself with low people, will one day throw you into great trouble
ocitto ka potto banya bot lureme 	he went to ask for a loan from his friends
pim bongo pa latin man wek i kwoo	measure this child and make clothes for him
otuk ki ngwec cut i kare ma owinynyo lokke 	running at once on hearing the news 
nyig tyen nyo nyig cing 	toes or fingers
en reggo belle lalig lig, pe beddo ka wer callo mon mukene ma gibeddo ka wer ka gireggo 	she grinds her corn quietly, not like other women who sing when grinding the corn 
tye ka pal callo ngat ma tye ki aona opiyo 	he is emaciating like a person who has tuberculosis
joo ma giwotto labongo waar puny tyengi kak mada 	people who walk barefooted, their heels do crack very much 
Ento ka wuri kec, wuwir wiwu woko ki moo, ci wulwok waŋwu woko bene, 	But if you do not forgive others their sins, your Father will not forgive your sins.
wang latin pe leng 	the child's face is not clean
rukke callo lakwat dyang  	he dresses like a shepherd
Pien i kare ma yam watittiwu pi teko pa Rwotwa Yecu Kricito, ki pi dwogone, onoŋo pe walubo lok ododo mogo ma wan wayubo ayuba ki ryekowa, ento wan yam waneno deyo me ditte ki waŋwa. 	For we did not follow cleverly devised stories when we told you about the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ in power, but we were eyewitnesses of his majesty.
Ceŋ myero en oŋol ki i Camaria. 	So he left Judea and went back once more to Galilee.
gupenye ni, “Tit botwa, twer aŋo mumiyo itimo gin magi	“Tell us by what authority you are doing these things,” they said
Ento ka bel ocek, ci dano cako kayone cut, pien noŋo kare me kayo bel doŋ oromo.” 	As soon as the grain is ripe, he puts the sickle to it, because the harvest has come.”
Owor dok lagalle twatwal 	Owor is always late
ka wato bene, wato pi Rwot. Mumiyo kadi wakwo, nyo wato, wan jo pa Rwot. 	If we live, we live for the Lord; and if we die, we die for the Lord
tye ka Iwoddo lokke i cwinynye	he is pondering about the matter 
dako ogonynye nyako 	the woman has delivered a girl
rub kin awobe caa ma giwakke twatwalli 	confuse the boys there who are very proud
Ŋat acel acel odok i ode.	They replied, “Are you from Galilee, too? Look into it, and you will find that a prophet does not come out of Galilee.”
Utmegina, lok magi aloko odok i koma ki i kom Apolo piwu, wek omi wun wapwonnye i komwa ki te lok man, ni, “Wubed kun wulubo gin ma yam gicoyo,” wek dano mo i kinwu pe owakke, ma pako dano acel kun cayo kwede ŋat mukene. 	Now, brothers and sisters, I have applied these things to myself and Apollos for your benefit, so that you may learn from us the meaning of the saying, “Do not go beyond what is written.” Then you will not be puffed up in being a follower of one of us over against the other.
Gin ma icoyo-ni obedo mere kodi nono, nyo kodi kal, nyo kit kodi mukene-ne, pe en kom ginapita ma bidoŋo-ni. 	When you sow, you do not plant the body that will be, but just a seed, perhaps of wheat or of something else.
pien yam gicoyo ni, “Nen, doŋ aketo got me wel i Cion, ma ayero me got me twok ot, ŋat muye en, lewic pe bimako.” 	As you come to him, the living Stone—rejected by humans but chosen by God and precious to him—
Yecu otito bot lupwonnyene ni, “Ka ce dano mo mito lubo kora, myero okwoŋ kwerre kekene, ka ocak tiŋo yatariyane, olub kwede kora. 	Then Jesus said to his disciples, “Whoever wants to be my disciple must deny themselves and take up their cross and follow me.
min latin wurru kwon ki litino me acamma 	the mother prepares a large amount of kwon for the children to eat
gin gitye tung potto ceng me boma nyo taun 	they are on the West side of the town
Ento jo mukene i kingi, jo me Caiprac ki me Cirene, ka guo i Antiokia ci guloko ki Lugrik bene kun gitito pi Rwot Yecu. 	Some of them, however, men from Cyprus and Cyrene, went to Antioch and began to speak to Greeks also, telling them the good news about the Lord Jesus.
Jo ma yam gutito lok man bot lukwena gin aye Maliam Lamagdala, Joana, ki Maliam min Yakobo, ki mon mukene ma onoŋo tye kwedgi. 	When they came back from the tomb, they told all these things to the Eleven and to all the others.
Kadi bed kumeno, jo mapol pe gitye ki ŋec macalo meno. Jo mogo doŋ guŋiyo woko i woro jogi nio wa ceŋ tin	But not everyone possesses this knowledge
pirro lok i kom dano pe ber 	plotting against the people is not good 
Doŋ gityeko gonyowu woko ki i opii me bal, wudoko opii me kit ma atir. 	But thanks be to God that, though you used to be slaves to sin, you have come to obey from your heart the pattern of teaching that has now claimed your allegiance.
ngat ma tye ki teer myero pe obed ka lingo teer ma pek twatwal 	the one who is pregnant should not be carrying very heavy loads 
litino gimarro mwoddo acari mada	the children love very much to eat the raw sweet sorghum
Macalo Wora omiya ker, an bene abimiyowu, 	And I confer on you a kingdom, just as my Father conferred one on me,
pwon omiyo dano pe dong gimaarro coyo waraga pien dong gilokko ki ngat ma imitto alokka 	a phone has made people hate to write letters because you can speak straightaway to the one you want 
ceng opotto 	the sun has set 
Ka gubino gubako doggi botgi, ka gukwanyogi woko, gucikogi ni gua woko ki i gaŋ meno. 	They came to appease them and escorted them from the prison, requesting them to leave the city.
rue obot tyenni ma iwotto kwedde i dye otti 	wipe off your foot prints from the floor on which you walked 
aburo ginynyo umme 	cold in the head is irritating his nose 
gut tyenne ma owil mitto rwee matek mada ka wek ocang maber 	his ankle which had been dislocated needs very active stretching, that is, active physiotherapy in order to heal well
Askari gugamo doggi ni, “Pe tye ŋat mo ma yam oloko macalo dano man.” 	Finally the temple guards went back to the chief priests and the Pharisees, who asked them, “Why didn’t you bring him in?”
ma wun bene wutye i kingi, wun dano ma doŋ gilwoŋowu me bedo jo pa Yecu Kricito. 	and who through the Spirit of holiness was appointed the Son of God in power by his resurrection from the dead: Jesus Christ our Lord.
Myero wucokke kacel i nyiŋ Rwotwa, ma noŋo an bene atye kwedwu i cwiny ki tek pa Rwotwa Yecu, 	So when you are assembled and I am with you in spirit, and the power of our Lord Jesus is present,
ka onyiko cok ka neno, ci dwan obino, 	As he went over to get a closer look, he heard the Lord say:
Ci guuro matek twatwal ma kun giwacci, “Jo ma giloko-ni mono pe gin ducu Lugalilaya? 	Utterly amazed, they asked: “Aren’t all these who are speaking Galileans?
Ci lwak guwo matek ni, “Dwan Lubaŋa, pe dwan dano!” 	They shouted, “This is the voice of a god, not of a man.”
Lupwonycik ma i kin Luparicayo, ka guneno ni en ocamo kacel ki lubalo ki lujog-mucoro, gupenyo lupwonnyene ni, “Piŋo en camo kacel ki lujog-mucoro ki lubalo?” 	When the teachers of the law who were Pharisees saw him eating with the sinners and tax collectors, they asked his disciples: “Why does he eat with tax collectors and sinners?”
remo tye ka cweer i tyenne 	he is bleeding from his leg 
anyira gubinno ka myel ma gurukko anyig keken i pyergi 	the girls came wearing only the strip of tin foils wound up into a tube around their backs
Ka doŋ odonyo i Jerucalem ci gaŋ ducu otugge woko pire, kun dano giwacci, “Man aŋa?” 	The crowds that went ahead of him and those that followed shouted, “Hosanna to the Son of David!” “Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord!” “Hosanna in the highest heaven!”
Ka wawinyo lok man, wan ki jo ma kunnu walego Paulo ni pe ocit i Jerucalem. 	When we heard this, we and the people there pleaded with Paul not to go up to Jerusalem.
ka orwone mukene wao wa Camoc, i ŋe nino meno wao i Mileto. 	The day after that we crossed over to Samos, and on the following day arrived at Miletus.
akeyo lim woko ling ma gimiina i kom jami atata keken 	I wasted all the money that I was given on useless things
tallo dano pe ber	to cast spell on the people is not good 
Ci cutcut gua woko ki i kacokke, gudonyo i ot pa Petero ki Anderiya, gunywako wot ki Yakobo ki Jon. 	As soon as they left the synagogue, they went with James and John to the home of Simon and Andrew.
Yecu dok owaco botgi ni, “Kikopo ma an abimato kwede-ni, wun bene wubimato kwede, ki kit batija ma an abibatija kwede-ni, wun bene gibibatijawu kwede	Jesus said to them, “You will drink the cup I drink and be baptized with the baptism I am baptized with,
twoorre ki meja i dye wor 	knocking against the table at night 
Catan dok otere i gaŋ maleŋ, ci ocibe ocuŋ i wi labila ot pa Lubaŋa, 	Then the devil took him to the holy city and had him stand on the highest point of the temple.
Ka dok Yecu owaco botgi ni, “Pe wulwor	So the women hurried away from the tomb, afraid yet filled with joy, and ran to tell his disciples.
kac pa pino kec mada 	the sting of the hornet is very painful
Ka Yecu oneno ci cwinye ocwer matek, ocako wacogi ni, “Wuwek litino gubin bota, pe wugeŋgi	When Jesus saw this, he was indignant
yang ononggo aworre mada ento pi gin ma otimmo owekko koni dong acaye mada	I used to respect him very much but for what he has done now, I do despise him very much
Ka en oewoto, gipeto ginarukagi i waŋayo. 	As he went along, people spread their cloaks on the road.
pim bongo pa latin man wek i kwoo 	measure this child and make clothes for her
dakoni pe wotto maber pien abok dong obwoye woko	the woman does not walk well because she is overwhelmed with the aching pain in the thighs and hip
odig maarro nen twatwal i kom litino	nosebleeding seen frequently in children
ka awacce ni an mwaka na dong apar wiye aboro ci obwonna woko ni an pud peya aoo i mwaka me apar wiye aboro 	when I told him that i was eighteen years old, he disagreed with me and thought that I had not yet made that age
nyabbe pa kom pe gin maber 	laziness is not a good thing 
lweny ocakke ma ceng dong tye abwora 	the fighting started in the afternoon 
Mumiyo an aŋolo ni, pe myero wayelu Lurok ma gulokke bot Lubaŋa, 	“It is my judgment, therefore, that we should not make it difficult for the Gentiles who are turning to God.
Wegi lobo meno gutimowa tim me kica ma pe nen atata	The islanders showed us unusual kindness
wotto lworro ot 	walking round the house
wer me tukko ki me yom cwiny 	operas and others 
Pilato owaco botgi ni, “Wutye ki askari ma gin lukur-piny	The next day, the one after Preparation Day, the chief priests and the Pharisees went to Pilate.
gwok coc  	does not know how to write
nyako jubi 	heifer of buffalo
ki dano ma tye wa i poto pe odok cen paco ka omo ginarukane. 	Let no one in the field go back to get their cloak.
Lok man kono oa ki kwene, lutuwa, min Rwoda me bino bota? 	But why am I so favored, that the mother of my Lord should come to me?
latin myero owiny juk 	the child must accept restraining 
otyekko pyello odwel i dye ot ki welo 	she has already laid down the hides on the ground for the guests 
pwony en aye tic maber ma myero dano mapol gukwany 	teaching is the best protession that many people should take 
rwic ladep ki lwet cinggi 	crush the flea with your finger nails
kop angoo?, kop pe 	what matter?, no matter
nen lacoo opotino man tye ka time macallo latin kun kono otira macon 	look at this man who is behaving like a child, he is a very old person
Pien en ki dano ducu ma tye kwede guuro pi rec ma gumako. 	When Simon Peter saw this, he fell at Jesus’ knees and said, “Go away from me, Lord; I am a sinful man!”
mak tutuno en aye pok 	what you have been given already and is in your hand, is yours, hold on to it, you may not get some more 
I adane acoyo botwu ni pe wuribbe ki ŋat mo ma gilwoŋo ni dano pa Kricito, ka otimo tim kwele, nyo ka en obedo laworo me jami, nyo obedo dano ma woro cal jok, gwok nyo layet dano, lamero nyo layak	But now I am writing to you that you must not associate with anyone who claims to be a brother or sister but is sexually immoral or greedy, an idolater or slanderer, a drunkard or swindler
lok ma owinynyo omiyo onyoyo komme woko pe dong bicitto ka pyem me dongge 	the news which he heard discouraged him, therefore he will not be going for the boxing contest
Ka yo me tere i nyim Yecu oloyogi pi lwak, ci guyabo wi ot ki malo ka ma en tye iye. Ka gutyeko mukone ci gucwalo kitara ma latwo obuto iye piny i nyime. 	Since they could not get him to Jesus because of the crowd, they made an opening in the roof above Jesus by digging through it and then lowered the mat the man was lying on.
Ento an awaco botwu ni, Pe myero wukwoŋ kwoŋ mo kadi ki acel, kadi ki nyiŋ polo, pien meno komker pa Lubaŋa, 	But I tell you, do not swear an oath at all: either by heaven, for it is God’s throne;
wangge tek  	he is smart, cannot be deceived, cunning, subtle, clear sighted
obwonno cam ma gimiine 	he thought that the food given to him was not enough
muni umgi okongge, joo macol umgi obab 	the Europeans have aquiline noses, blacks have flat noses 
i kare ma wunyomme ni ononggo pe wumitte mada? 	the time when you were married did you not love each other very much? 
i tukko me lawala ka wumitti pe gilwalwu ci myerro wuyubbe matek mada 	if you do not want to be defeated in the game of circle, you must prepare yourselves very well 
agaa ma oono? 	who has coughed? 
amarro caa ma komme lye iye jabu 	I like a watch with gold body
pimmo kare maber me timmo gin mo 	to wait for the right time to do something
yat opotto ni janga  	the whole tree fell completely to the ground
“Ibikoko aŋee, in Korajin! Ibikoko aŋee, in Betecaida! Kono yam tic madito ma gitiyo i ii gitiyo i Turo ki Cidon, kono onoŋo jone guŋut wa con, kun giruko boŋo cola, ma gibedo i buru bene. 	“Woe to you, Chorazin! Woe to you, Bethsaida! For if the miracles that were performed in you had been performed in Tyre and Sidon, they would have repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes.
opotto ci oturro okuk dudde woko 	he fell and broke his coccyx
Owacce ni, ‘Abiŋolo kop loyi kun lubo lok ma oa ki i dogi keni, in latic marac! Yam iŋeyo ni an a dano magwa, akwanyo gin ma pe akano, akayo ka ma pe acoyo, 	“His master replied, ‘I will judge you by your own words, you wicked servant! You knew, did you, that I am a hard man, taking out what I did not put in, and reaping what I did not sow?
Kit meno jo ma gudoŋ cen gibibedo jo me ati, ki jo me ati gibidoko jo ma lacen.” 	“So the last will be first, and the first will be last.”
Ŋat ma oloyo, abimiye twero me bedo kacel kweda i wi komkerra, kit macalo an bene doŋ aloyo ci abedo kacel ki Wora i wi komkerre-ni. 	To the one who is victorious, I will give the right to sit with me on my throne, just as I was victorious and sat down with my Father on his throne.
gin gitye ka wot awotta pe gimitto gin mo 	they are just walking, they do not want anything 
I kare-nu onoŋo tye laco mo ma nyiŋe Baraba, ma yam gitweyo i mabuc i kin jo mujemo ma guneko dano i kare me jemogi-nu. 	A man called Barabbas was in prison with the insurrectionists who had committed murder in the uprising.
Atittiwu ni gin madit makato ot pa Lubaŋa tye kany. 	Or haven’t you read in the Law that the priests on Sabbath duty in the temple desecrate the Sabbath and yet are innocent?
bed piny i nom 	sit down on the ground 
Ci olwoŋo lumony aryo ma lulo dano miya miya, owaco botgi ni, “Wuyubbe i kin cawa adek me dyewor ki askari miya aryo, ki wegi aguragura pyerabiro, ki wegi toŋ miya aryo wek gucit Cecaria. 	Then he called two of his centurions and ordered them, “Get ready a detachment of two hundred soldiers, seventy horsemen and two hundred spearmen to go to Caesarea at nine tonight.
Ŋat ma kwano lok ma gitito i buk man i nyim lwak tye ki gum, jo ma winyo bene tye ki gum, ki jo ma lubo gin ma gicoyo iye bene tye ki gum, pien kare doŋ cok. 	Blessed is the one who reads aloud the words of this prophecy, and blessed are those who hear it and take to heart what is written in it, because the time is near.
twakko ringo ma otwoo nyo del raa 	to cook for a long time dried meat or hippopotamus hide
Pien Wod pa dano bidwogo ki deyo pa Wonne kacel ki lumalaikane, ci biculo dano acel acel kun lubo kit tic ma yam dano-ni otiyo. 	For the Son of Man is going to come in his Father’s glory with his angels, and then he will reward each person according to what they have done.
Ka lamalaika ma oloko kwede-ni otyeko wot, ci Kornelio olwoŋo luticce aryo ki askari acel ma woro Labaŋa ki i kin jo ma gitiyo bote-ni. 	When the angel who spoke to him had gone, Cornelius called two of his servants and a devout soldier who was one of his attendants.
Ci ori i tim pi nino pyeraŋwen, kun Catan obedo ka bite. Pe ocamo gin mo i kare meno ducu	where for forty days he was tempted by the devil
pyee kitte macalo ogwal pyee kwede 	jump as the frog does, that is hop, leap and hop 
Ka man otum, ci Yecu okato woko, oneno lajog-mucoro mo ma nyiŋe Levi, kun obedo piny i ka jogo mucoro	Immediately he stood up in front of them, took what he had been lying on and went home praising God.
com pii magic wek okwee 	pour cold water into it to cool it
“Wupwony carolok i kom yat oduro. Ka ce jaŋe doŋ olot, ci pote luk, ci doŋ wuŋeyo ni oro doŋ cok. 	“Now learn this lesson from the fig tree: As soon as its twigs get tender and its leaves come out, you know that summer is near.
litino ducu gujemmo citto ka kwan 	all the children went on strike against going to study 
joo magi ducu litino anywalla me Patiko pe dano alimma 	all these people are begotten children of Patiko not bought or slaves
rut it latin me ketto ogwilo 	pierce the child's earlobes for putting through earrings
cug matek ni gig i gin ma itiyo ci ibiloyo maber 	stand firm in what you do and you will succeed 
kel pot oboke i um ki wii cak wek lwangi pe gupot iye 	bring the leaves and cover the milk with them in order to prevent flies falling into it 
jwinya acel keken ityeni, ayilla ki arem ma en kello, genggi nino woko 	the irritation and pain produced by only one jigger in your toe, prevents you from sleeping 
gwokke pe icel wii lawotti ki lakkii 	be careful, do not stone the head of your friend
dek ma giteddo ma girubbo ki nyanya beddo mit mada. 	a sauce cooked mixed with tomatoes is very tasty 
leb meja man wudiir cen 	carry this table and move it away
nyib yer wiye mabocco woko 	trim off his long hair
Ka doŋ gukelogi, ci guketogi i nyim lukiko, ka ajwaka madit openyogi, 	The apostles were brought in and made to appear before the Sanhedrin to be questioned by the high priest.
Owaco botgi ni, “Ada, awacciwu ni, pe tye ŋatti mo ma oweko ode, nyo dakone, nyo omegine, nyo lunyodone, nyo litinone, pi ker pa Lubaŋa, 	“Truly I tell you,” Jesus said to them, “no one who has left home or wife or brothers or sisters or parents or children for the sake of the kingdom of God
nen tokke ma oyonne kwedde 	look at her neck which is tall and bending forwards
gwek gi woko matino lino	cut them into very small portions
Doŋ awaco botwu ni, macalo ada pa Kricito tye i cwinya, pe gibigeŋo nyattena i lok man i lobo Akaya ducu. 	I robbed other churches by receiving support from them so as to serve you.
ger ot merri kany 	build your house here 
“Wan wawinyo ka en loko ni, ‘An amuko ot pa Lubaŋa-ni woko, ma yam gigero ki ciŋ-ŋi, ci dok agero mukene-ne nino adek keken, ma pe gitiyo ki ciŋ.’ ” 	“We heard him say, ‘I will destroy this temple made with human hands and in three days will build another, not made with hands.’”
joo man gin aye waadi pa Otto 	these are the relatives of Otto
cukko tic 	to change work
gupirro lok i komme 	they conspired or plotted against him
itte oding 	he is partially deaf 
coo mukene girukko roc wek ogeng gin nonggo twoo nyo yacco dako mo ka gibutto kwedgi 	some men wear condoms in order to prevent them from getting infections or impregnating any woman when they sleep with them
Latic meno tye ki gum, ma laditte ka obino onoŋo en tye ka tiyo ticce kit meno. 	It will be good for that servant whose master finds him doing so when he returns.
Pien lok man giciko piwu ki pi litinowu ki pi jo ducu ma gitye ka mabor, ma Rwot Lubaŋawa bilwoŋogi bote.” 	The promise is for you and your children and for all who are far off—for all whom the Lord our God will call.”
wiye tek  	he is frank and bold
Wulub kita, macalo an bene alubo kit pa Kricito. 	Follow my example, as I follow the example of Christ.
awal man twerro tucce 	the gourd plate can be pierced
Ki in Kapernaum, gibitiŋi woko malo i polo? Pe kumeno, gibidwoki woko piny i Lyel. 	And you, Capernaum, will you be lifted to the heavens? No, you will go down to Hades.
giyubbo nyonyo bene me yat ma gimiyo ki jo ma remo pe i komgi 	iron is also prepared and made as medicine for the treatment of anaemia
Yam gutiyo tic mukato genwa woko, pien gukwoŋo mine kengi bot Lubaŋa, ka doŋ pi mit pa Lubaŋa gucako mine kengi botwa bene. 	they urgently pleaded with us for the privilege of sharing in this service to the Lord’s people.
terro bongo i ot	to take the cloth into the house
pe warommo, walocco yoo ki larema 	we did not meet, we passed each other in opposite direction
dakone okang woko 	the woman is barren or his wife is barren 
ywecce pe tye maber 	his breathing is not good
Ci lwak dano gukelo bote luput ki luŋolo, jo ma te lebgi oto, ki lutowaŋ, ki lutwo mukene mapol, gupyelogi piny ka tyen Yecu, ci en ocaŋogi. 	Then Jesus said to her, “Woman, you have great faith! Your request is granted.” And her daughter was healed at that moment.
citto ka wot me rweene ki me limmo yamo mamit 	taking a walk for stretching the legs and getting fresh air
dwe ma tar ber lwoko maro	this moon is so bright, it is good for seeing off mothers in law 
En oloko lok man pi teme, pien en kikome onoŋo ŋeyo gin ma ebitiyo. 	When Jesus looked up and saw a great crowd coming toward him, he said to Philip, “Where shall we buy bread for these people to eat?”
Labit dano obino ci owacce ni, “Ka in i Wod pa Lubaŋa, wac ki godi magi gulokke gudok kwon.” 	The tempter came to him and said, “If you are the Son of God, tell these stones to become bread.”
ngaddo get cuka 	trimming the edge of the sheet
kot tye ka meny mada, kot koni cweer  	there is a lot of flushing in the sky, it is likely to rain soon
twoo tye ka mee mada i komme 	the disease is getting worse on him
Jo Nineve bicuŋ kacel ki yalwak man i kare me ŋolo kop, ci miyo kop loyogi, pien gin yam guŋut pi lok ma Yona onoŋo otito, ento nen, gin madit makato Yona tye kany. 	The men of Nineveh will stand up at the judgment with this generation and condemn it, for they repented at the preaching of Jonah; and now something greater than Jonah is here.
Pien cakke i kare macon Moses tye ki jo ma gitito lokke i gaŋ ducu, kun gikwano cikke i kacokke i ceŋ cabit ducu.” 	For the law of Moses has been preached in every city from the earliest times and is read in the synagogues on every Sabbath.”
Pien yam gicoyo ni, “Macalo atye kwo-ni man Rwot ma owaco, jo ducu gibirumo coŋgi i nyima, ki dano ducu gibipako Lubaŋa.” 	You, then, why do you judge your brother or sister? Or why do you treat them with contempt? For we will all stand before God’s judgment seat.
Man aye gin ma aloko botwu, utmegina, ni, gin ma tye ki kom ki remo pe twero leyo ker pa Lubaŋa, gin ma top bene pe twero leyo gin mo ma pe top. 	I declare to you, brothers and sisters, that flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God, nor does the perishable inherit the imperishable.
Yecu ocako mako ciŋ lawaŋe-oto, ci otere woko wa i ŋe gaŋ	He took the blind man by the hand and led him outside the village
ento lujogmucoro ki mon ma malaya guye en. Dok bene kadi bed wuneno gin mutimme, lacen pe wuŋut, dok pe wuye en. 	For John came to you to show you the way of righteousness, and you did not believe him, but the tax collectors and the prostitutes did
opotto ni Iwany 	he fell heavily on its full length 
ocitto ka mwonno odde 	he went to plaster his house 
guri i ot pa Lubaŋa jwijwi, kun gipwoyo Lubaŋa.	Then they worshiped him and returned to Jerusalem with great joy.
Ci lamalaika ma onoŋo aneno ocuŋ i nam ki i lobo-ni otiŋo ciŋe lacuc malo i polo, 	Then the angel I had seen standing on the sea and on the land raised his right hand to heaven.
two caddo teere there onobbo latin woke 	frequent diarrhoea weakened the child 
lokke pe wacce lit 	the words cannot be said, but here it means that it is such a bad and shameful word which cannot be pronounced or said
cak potto woko ka pe gimurro 	the milk goes bad if it is not boiled
laworo guranynye mada 	yesterday they made fun or fool of each other
Pien atittiwu ni, lunebi ki luker mapol yam guparo pi neno gin ma wun wuneno, ento pe guneno, ki winyo gin ma wun wuwinyo, ento pe guwinyo.” 	For I tell you that many prophets and kings wanted to see what you see but did not see it, and to hear what you hear but did not hear it.”
“Bot lamalaika pa lwak muye an ma gitye i Laodikia co kit man ni, “ ‘Man lok ma oa ki bot Amen, ma en aye caden ma genne ki me ada, gin ducu ma Lubaŋa oketo yam ocakke ki i kome. 	“To the angel of the church in Laodicea write: These are the words of the Amen, the faithful and true witness, the ruler of God’s creation.
wit lakkii ci ibol kwica 	swing the stone and hurl it there
Ka doŋ oo i cwiny dyewor woo owinnye madwoŋ ni, ‘Nen, lanyom doŋ bino! Wukat woko ka jole.’ 	“At midnight the cry rang out: ‘Here’s the bridegroom! Come out to meet him!’
Dok en yam okwoŋo kwoŋ bot jo mene ce ni, gin pe gibidonyo i yweyo bote? Pe okwoŋo kwoŋ meno bot jo ma yam pe gubedo luwiny? 	And to whom did God swear that they would never enter his rest if not to those who disobeyed?
Ajwagi madito ki jo ma i Lukiko ducu guyenyo lok me caden me goba i kom Yecu wek gineke woko, 	The chief priests and the whole Sanhedrin were looking for false evidence against Jesus so that they could put him to death.
latinne dok maarro redde twatwal ka tye ka tukko 	the child is fond of shouting very much when playing
pik pil i agulo me amatta 	fill the pot with water for drinking 
Odiko ma en doŋ dok i Jerucalem, kec oneke. 	And he left them and went out of the city to Bethany, where he spent the night.
Yam tye i Jerucalem dano mo ma nyiŋe Cimeon. En yam dano ma kite atir ma lworo Lubaŋa, kun kuro kare ma gibikweyo iye cwiny jo Icrael	Now there was a man in Jerusalem called Simeon, who was righteous and devout
Ka doŋ lukwena pa Jon gudok, Yecu ocako lok ki lwak i kom Jon ni, “Onoŋo wucito i tim ka neno gin aŋo? Onoŋo wucito ka neno lagada ma yamo obedo ka yeŋone? 	After John’s messengers left, Jesus began to speak to the crowd about John: “What did you go out into the wilderness to see? A reed swayed by the wind?
obinno lamullo mullo nio ka odonyo kwedde wa i ot pien owillo tyenne woko 	he came crawling upon his knees up to the house, because he dislocated her leg
ka wan jo ma pe genne, en gire genne nakanaka, pien en pe twero kwerre kene.” 	Here is a trustworthy saying: If we died with him, we will also live with him;
Cutcut awinyo lamalaika ma loyo pii ka wacci, “Kop ma iŋolo-ni iŋolo giri atir, in ŋat ma tye, yam bene ibedo tye con, in Ŋat Maleŋ. 	Then I heard the angel in charge of the waters say: “You are just in these judgments, O Holy One, you who are and who were;
Yam pe gimiyowa cwiny me lobo man, ento gimiyowa Cwiny ma oa ki bot Lubaŋa, wek omi waniaŋ i kom kit mot ducu ma Lubaŋa miyowa pi kicane. 	What we have received is not the spirit of the world, but the Spirit who is from God, so that we may understand what God has freely given us.
Aniaŋ maber ni, Lubaŋa ma ocako tic man i kinwu bicobo kakare nio wa i nino pa Kricito Yecu. 	because of your partnership in the gospel from the first day until now,
wod pa Kainan, wod pa Arpakcad, wod pa Cem, wod pa Nua, wod pa Lamek, 	the son of Cainan, the son of Arphaxad, the son of Shem, the son of Noah, the son of Lamech,
kot cok ka cok 	the rain is about to stop 
ocikko Olobo ni myero ogutti  	he warned Olobo to reform
Pi meno, wutiŋ badwu mukwe-ni malo, wurye coŋwu magoro, 	Therefore, strengthen your feeble arms and weak knees.
ywaane aywaaya ki iye pe mullo 	pulls along on his abdomen and not crawling 
butto i wii ckia 	sleeps on the wooden bed
cak ma libo 	fresh milk 
adagi kwon gwiny	flesh of the buttocks
amitto bongo ma komme ocwinynyo ma kwici kwici 	I want a cloth which is spotted black and white 
Yecu owoto orumo gaŋi mapatpat ki gaŋi matino ma i caro-gu ducu, kun pwonyo i kacokkegi, dok tito kwede lok me kwena maber me ker pa Lubaŋa ki caŋo kit two ducu kadi wa kit goro ducu. 	But the Pharisees said, “It is by the prince of demons that he drives out demons.”
Ka Yecu onene kun kok, ki Lujudaya ma gubino kwede bene gikok, cwinye opoto, iye owaŋ matek. 	When Mary reached the place where Jesus was and saw him, she fell at his feet and said, “Lord, if you had been here, my brother would not have died.”
piir me kwoo  	planning to steal
Lubaŋa gire otamo ni emi jone guŋe kit ma muŋ man pire dit kwede i kin Lurok, dok me deyo madwoŋ, i mitine kene. Muŋ meno en ene, ni, Kricito bedo i iwu, miyo wubedo ki gen me nywako deyo pa Luba?a. 	the mystery that has been kept hidden for ages and generations, but is now disclosed to the Lord’s people.
Ka ce lok me kwena maber ma wan wakelo oumme woko, noŋo oumme ki tuŋ bot dano ma gitye ka rwenyo woko arwenya. 	On the contrary, by setting forth the truth plainly we commend ourselves to everyone’s conscience in the sight of God.
amor ber mada me jwayo kom ka gitye ka lwok 	the sponge is very good for rubbing the body when bathing
dwe pudi tye ongwec  	the moon is still in the concave shape
tyenne owil woko ka tukko odilo 	he sprained his foot while playing football
tyen mapol latin acel i kom rudi marro lwii woko 	many times one ot the twins escapes
Litino awobe gua ci guboyo kome, ka gutere woko ka yike. 	Then some young men came forward, wrapped up his body, and carried him out and buried him.
I kare ducu atyeko nyuto botwu ni pi tiyo tic matek macalo meno myero wakony lugoro kun wapo lok pa Rwotwa Yecu ma yam owaco ni, ‘Miyo mot kelo gum makato gamo agama.’ ” 	In everything I did, I showed you that by this kind of hard work we must help the weak, remembering the words the Lord Jesus himself said: ‘It is more blessed to give than to receive.’ ”
jalle maarro gango lok mada ki luditto 	the fellow likes very much to speak rudely to the elders
Lukwat guriŋo woko, gucito wa i gaŋ ci gutito lok i kom gin ducu mutimme, wa lok mutimme i kom jo aryo ma cen tye i komgi. 	The demons begged Jesus, “If you drive us out, send us into the herd of pigs.”
pe igul yat ma gimiini kadi kec, muny 	don't spit the medicine given to you, swallow it
litino man lukwaa Omal	these children are the grandchildren of Omal 
Yecu olwoŋe ni, “Maliam.” En olokke, owacce i leb Ibru ni, “Rabboni!” ma te lokke ni, Lapwony.	He asked her, “Woman, why are you crying? Who is it you are looking for?” Thinking he was the gardener, she said, “Sir, if you have carried him away, tell me where you have put him, and I will get him.”
owaco botgi ni, “Wun wukelo dano man bota ni en ŋat ma rwenyo lwak, 	and said to them, “You brought me this man as one who was inciting the people to rebellion
Abio botwu ma noŋo doŋ koŋ awoto ao i Makedonia, pien atamo me wok ki kunnu. 	After I go through Macedonia, I will come to you—for I will be going through Macedonia.
Ka anywako camo cam ki jo mukene kun apwoyo Lubaŋa bene, piŋo giyeta pi gin ma doŋ atyeko pwoyo Lubaŋa pire? 	If I take part in the meal with thankfulness, why am I denounced because of something I thank God for?
latin man kitte rac nyunynyo cet dok i kabedo ma pat pat	the child has bad habit of passing small faeces everywhere 
ka mitti pe giorre ci manno yat ci rweny woko 	when he does not want to be sent on an errand, he goes round a tree and disappears
en aye got matek matar ma iye mukene ocoyo coyo, ma gitwerro jwayo dokko maber mada, gigerro ki oddi 	it is a hard white stone which, sometimes has lines, can be highly polished, it is used in building houses 
larwa ki cam kec tye ka nekkowa mada 	save us with food, we are dying of hunger 
parro mada pi rwenyno latinne	mourns very much the loss of his child
lakaa bel ocitto ka kayo bel  	the harvester went to harvest the corn
bongo man ckide oyot mada, tekki ijegge i kom ot nyo ibeddo i ka ma apwa rye iye ci chkie woko cut 	this cloth can easily be made dirty, once you lean on a dirty wall or sit on a chair full of dust, it becomes dirty
dano ma ngeyo piny myerro pe odony i lok me gwarra 	an educated person should not involve himself in copying
Ŋat ma ite tye myero owiny lok ma Cwiny Maleŋ oloko bot lwak ducu ma guye an.’ ”	Whoever has ears, let them hear what the Spirit says to the churches.”
in latin imono ka beddo i kin luditto 	you are a child, it is inaprpropriate for you to sit among the elders
kit rac pa latinni twerro jukke 	the bad behaviour of this child can be stopped 
papai ne dong omalle woko  	the pawpaw now has become yellow
“Ento nino meno ki cawa meno, pe tye ŋat mo ma ŋeyo, kadi wa lumalaika ma i polo, kadi wa Wod, ento kono Lubaŋa Won keken aye ŋeyo gire. 	“But about that day or hour no one knows, not even the angels in heaven, nor the Son, but only the Father.
maarro lok conynya mada 	likes very much 
Pe gutwero mako lok mo ma oa ki i doge i nyim lwak	They were unable to trap him in what he had said there in public
dano gujimmo i lukiko 	people assembled in great numbers at the court 
likwaya mukene gitye i tic ma donggo mada 	some of my grandchildren have very important jobs
Ento makato magi ducu, myero wubed kun wupoŋ ki mar. Pien mar keken aye tweyo jami ducu, ribogi kacel ma cobo bene maber licwic. 	Here there is no Gentile or Jew, circumcised or uncircumcised, barbarian, Scythian, slave or free, but Christ is all, and is in all.
Pi mito niaŋ i kom lok ma gidote iye atere i Lukikogi. 	I wanted to know why they were accusing him, so I brought him to their Sanhedrin.
wamitti in icit ka pwony Keyo 	we want you to go to teach at Keyo 
Meno aye kit ma yam giyubo kwede. Ajwagi yam gidonyo i kema jwijwi teretere ka cobo ticgi me woro Lubaŋa. 	When everything had been arranged like this, the priests entered regularly into the outer room to carry on their ministry.
jok opotto i komme nyo jok omakko woko mitto gityet ka wek gikwany woko ki i komme 	the evil spirit has fallen upon him and affected him, it requires consultation with the spirit medium to remove it from him 
Rwot owaco ni, “Wuwiny lok ma laŋolkop ma pe kite atir owaco. 	And the Lord said, “Listen to what the unjust judge says.
piki piki tye lakitte aryo, mukwonggo ni meno me ngwec me nino ducu, me aryone ni meno me ngwec tuko 	there are two kinds of motor cycle, the first from the left is for ordinary  running but the second is for sports
Wun kara wubedo miŋ kuman! Wucako lubo kit me Cwiny, ci kombeddi doŋ wumito wugik ki tekkomwu? 	I would like to learn just one thing from you: Did you receive the Spirit by the works of the law, or by believing what you heard?
Me agikkine, wubed tek i Rwot ki twero me tekone. 	Do not threaten them, since you know that he who is both their Master and yours is in heaven, and there is no favoritism with him.
meno gin lutowaŋ ma gipeyo lutowaŋ wadigi. Ka ce latowaŋ peyo latowaŋ lawote, ci gin aryo ducu gibipoto woko i bur.” 	Leave them; they are blind guides
wubicakko reggo awene? 	when will you start to grind ?
Moses yam owaco ni dano ma tiyo tic ma atir ma cik mito, bikwo pire. 	Christ is the culmination of the law so that there may be righteousness for everyone who believes.
“Pe wulwor, wun romi manok, pien Wonwu oye atika me miyo botwu ker. 	“Do not be afraid, little flock, for your Father has been pleased to give you the kingdom.
palaa ne lebbe oluu pe twerro yanggu 	the edge of the knife is blunt, it cannot dissect 
ceddo me ringo 	snatching of the hawk is different from that of the kite
Ka guwinyo Paulo ka loko lok i kom cer ki i kin jo muto, jo mogo gucako caye ki jo mukene guwacci, “Wamito imed tito lok man botwa kare mukene.” 	When they heard about the resurrection of the dead, some of them sneered, but others said, “We want to hear you again on this subject.”
latin obeddo piny caa ni panyaka 	there is the fat well nourished child sitting
wot maber i kin buk ma gicannogi maber ci pe iyok iret mo piny 	move very carefully between the books that have been well piled and do not knock any of them down
pien larema mo oa i wot, ocora, ci pe atye ki cam mo ma myero aket i nyime.’ 	a friend of mine on a journey has come to me, and I have no food to offer him.’
tyenni ma okwee ni ka ibeddo ka temmo wot mot mot kwedde pi nino ki nino, ci tekke bidwoggo cen 	if you try to walk with your paralysed leg slowly daily, its strength will return
I kare ma Yecu pud tye ka lok bot lwak, nen, minne kacel ki omegine onoŋo gucuŋ woko, kun giwaco ni gimito lok ki Yecu. 	Then it says, ‘I will return to the house I left.’ When it arrives, it finds the house unoccupied, swept clean and put in order.
nyut cinggi 	show your hand 
Kadi bed omito neke woko, ento olworo lwak, pien lwak onoŋo giworo Jon ni en lanebi. 	for John had been saying to him: “It is not lawful for you to have her.”
yeene matir pudi peya walimmo 	we have not yet received his proven consent or acceptance
dano ne marro palle mada 	the man likes very much to be elusive
I kit kwo ma yam wubedo kwede, magi aye gin tim ma onoŋo wubedo ka lubogi. 	Because of these, the wrath of God is coming.
otti wonne tye kwene? 	where is the owner of this house? 
waar magi rommo tyenne maber 	these shoes fit him very well
ŋat ma tiro jo ma pyem kwede ki mwolo. Gwok nyo Lubaŋa bimiyogi cwiny me ŋut, ka wek doŋ guniaŋ maber i kom lok ada, 	And the Lord’s servant must not be quarrelsome but must be kind to everyone, able to teach, not resentful.
Wuwacci, “Cam tye pi ic, ki ic bene pi cam.” Ento gin aryo-nu ducu Lubaŋa bityekogi woko. Kom pe tye pi tim kwele, ento tye pi Rwot, Rwot bene tye pi kom. 	You say, “Food for the stomach and the stomach for food, and God will destroy them both.” The body, however, is not meant for sexual immorality but for the Lord, and the Lord for the body.
gweni ni twerro pitte ki nyim 	the chicken can be fed with simsim
joo ma kit meno pe gibecco  	people like those are not good
Pien kica yam omakowu i kom mabuc, dok bene cwinywu obedo yom kadi giyako jamiwu, pien wun kikomwu onoŋo doŋ wuŋeyo ni wutye ki jami mukene mabeco makato magi, dok ma ri nakanaka. 	You suffered along with those in prison and joyfully accepted the confiscation of your property, because you knew that you yourselves had better and lasting possessions.
kit macalo yam gicoyo ni, “Lubaŋa doŋ omiyo botgi cwiny me diŋo, omiyo waŋgi pe neno, itgi bene pe winyo lok, kadi wa onyoo.” 	So too, at the present time there is a remnant chosen by grace.
myero dong inog ot 	you should get a house but here it means also get married
Ento wan watito ryeko pa Lubaŋa ma en muŋ ma gikano, ryeko ma yam Lubaŋa oyubo wa con me kelo deyo botwa. 	No, we declare God’s wisdom, a mystery that has been hidden and that God destined for our glory before time began.
ngat ma tye ki cwiny me nek pe dano me nino ducu ento wiye nonggo oballe woko, lapoya 	to all good people the idea of killings do not come into their minds
loc me lobo pe gin ma yot 	governance of the countryt is not an easy thing 
Ento ka guniaŋ ni en Lujudaya, gucako wo awoya ci gudaŋŋe ki dwan acel pi cawa aryo kulu ni, “Atemi pa Jo Epeco dit mada.” 	But when they realized he was a Jew, they all shouted in unison for about two hours: “Great is Artemis of the Ephesians!”
Kombeddi doŋ wun kom Kricito, dano acel acel obedo dul kom Kricito. 	Now you are the body of Christ, and each one of you is a part of it.
Adokke iye ni, “Ladit, in iŋeyo.” En dok owaco bota ni, “Magi aye gin jo ma gua ki i can madit atika, gin bene doŋ gutyeko lwoko jorgi i remo pa Latin romo odoko matar adada. 	I answered, “Sir, you know.” And he said, “These are they who have come out of the great tribulation; they have washed their robes and made them white in the blood of the Lamb.
Ento Yecu ocikogi matek ni pe myero gutit lok man bot dano mo. 	Jesus strictly warned them not to tell this to anyone.
Wumot Pricika ki Akwila, ma gitiyo kacel kweda i Kricito Yecu. 	I commend to you our sister Phoebe, a deacon of the church in Cenchreae.
piyo latin ni ogoo lawotte	persuading the child to beat his friend
nyom pa litinoni bibeddo diki 	the marriage of the children will be tomorrow 
locco ma kitmeno pe ber	that type of ruling is not good 
I kine-nu lupwonnyene gubako doggi bote kun giwaco ni, “Lapwony, cam ba.” 	They came out of the town and made their way toward him.
jwat ngwec woko wek pe gunonggi kany 	take off and run away so that they may not find you here
Pi meno, kit macalo gikwanowa ni kitwa atir pi niye, watye doŋ ki kuc i nyim Lubaŋa, pi Rwotwa Yecu Kricito. 	to the only wise God be glory forever through Jesus Christ! Amen.
kot ongollo wiye woko ka binno kuno 	the rain prevented him from coming there 
lak palaane onyanynye woko	the edge of the knife is blunted 
Ka ce onoŋo yam giyubo ni gimak dano mo me bedo opii, ci gibitere woko i opii	“If anyone is to go into captivity, into captivity they will go
Ka piny doŋ oyuto, ci Yecu obedo piny kacel ki lupwonnye apar wiye aryo. 	When evening came, Jesus was reclining at the table with the Twelve.
tin dong apokko buk ki litino cukul 	today I have distributing the books to he school children
piny tin muttu  	there is no moon light today
En olarowa ki i can me to marac macalo man, dok bene bilarowa	We were under great pressure, far beyond our ability to endure, so that we despaired of life itself.
labiri-biri maarro tuk ki dyewor  	the bumblebee likes to fly at night
danone waat ki wan 	he is our relative
Krecen ocito mere i Galatia, ki Tito ocito i Dalmatia. 	for Demas, because he loved this world, has deserted me and has gone to Thessalonica
Ka gubedo piny ci gucako camo cam, ci Yecu owacogi ni, “Adada awacciwu ni, ŋat acel i kinwu bidoba, en aye dano ma camo kacel kweda.” 	While they were reclining at the table eating, he said, “Truly I tell you, one of you will betray me—one who is eating with me.”
cwaar Anek ber mada 	Anek's husband is very good
pii ne teere cok 	the pond is shallow
kor labwor ogeg 	the lion's chest is strongly built
jami mapol dong nongge kany	many things are now available here
tol tye ka rwide woko ki i gut dyel 	the rope is becoming tight on the goat's neck
baar wic gin marac mada miyo pe ininno dok pe itammo tam mo	headache is a very bad thing because it prevents you from sleeping or thinking of some-thing 
Ladit owaco bot laticce-nu ni, ‘Cit i gudo madito ki i ŋet yo, icuk dano ki tek wek gudony i ot, wek odaa opoŋ. 	“Then the master told his servant, ‘Go out to the roads and country lanes and compel them to come in, so that my house will be full.
dok bene gin ducu pe litino pa Abraim, pien gin likwaye	For not all who are descended from Israel are Israel.
litino gimaarro tukko ki amiina mada 	the children like very much to play with this tree which shuts its leaves when touched
twoo wig go wii dano 	illness does derange a man's mind 
Wutamo gin aŋo? Ka ce dano mo tye ki romine miya acel, ka acel i kingi ocito orwenyo woko, pe biweko romi pyeraboŋwen wiye aboŋwen-ni i wi cere-gu, ci cito ka yenyo en murwenyo-ni? 	“What do you think? If a man owns a hundred sheep, and one of them wanders away, will he not leave the ninety-nine on the hills and go to look for the one that wandered off?
yamo oretto yat opotto piny ni rum 	the wind knocked down the tree which fell and broke to pieces
I kom cik magi aryo lok ducu ma tye i cik ki i pwony pa lunebi gucuŋ iye.” 	And the second is like it: ‘Love your neighbor as yourself.’
myerro pe wuwiny lok pa lacoo ni pien en laguna twatwal  	do not listen to that man's words because he is a perpetual liar 
wanywakko yoo ki wonne 	we went tongether with his father 
Mumiyo gudok iye bot Yecu ni pe giŋeyo ka ma oa iye. 	So they answered, “We don’t know where it was from.”
timmo jamine la lingling mape yello iye Batt me 	he does his things quietly without bothering anybody
gutte i ot pe konynye 	hiding in the house does not help him 
pen en aye oceke ma aa ki i kom latin ci donynyo i pel man en aye oceke ma term cam ki remo ma aa ki ikom mine 	pen is a tube called umbilical cord which comes from the child to the placenta in the mother's womb, it is this tube that takes food and blood to the child from the mother
mumiyo owaco bot luticce ni, “Man aye Jon Labatija. Lubaŋa ocere woko ki i kin jo muto, en aye mumiyo lakit teko macalo meno tye ka tic i kome-ni.” 	For I tell you, you will not see me again until you say, ‘Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord.’”
Yecu ogamo ni, “Laco man pe obalo, kadi jo ma gunywale, ento man otimme wek tic pa Lubaŋa onen i kome. 	His disciples asked him, “Rabbi, who sinned, this man or his parents, that he was born blind?”
nak latin mucuggwa iteer icipitti 	remove this orange seedling, take it and transplant it
dek tye ka twak i agulo 	the sauce is boiling in the cooking pot, being cooked 
Yecu oa ki i Galilaya obino bot Jon i dog kulu Jordan, wek Jon obatija en. 	His winnowing fork is in his hand, and he will clear his threshing floor, gathering his wheat into the barn and burning up the chaff with unquenchable fire.”
gupwoone tin ki cak mada 	they churned the milk very much today
itte otoo 	he is deaf 
wang tula obeddo nigolo golo 	owls eyes are big and very large
Ci omiyo bot latic acel ciliŋ alip abic, bot dano mukene omiyo ciliŋ alip aryo, ki bot ŋat mukene omiyo ciliŋ alip acel	To one he gave five bags of gold, to another two bags, and to another one bag, each according to his ability
Pi meno, dano ma dumo leb mapatpat myero oleg Lubaŋa wek okonye me gonyo tyen lok ma eloko. 	For this reason the one who speaks in a tongue should pray that they may interpret what they say.
pok mungati man rye aryo 	divide this bread into two
piine ouya 	the water chocked me 
kit purre me makko dano ni pe ber 	the way of suddenly arresting the people is not good 
obwotte layab me doggola kace edwoggo ma enogge pe 	he left him the key for the door, in case he comes late and does not find him
labututu omakko latin omiyo cammo gin malim kelle arem 	the child got the mumps that is why he gets pain in the cheek when he eats sweet things
Kombeddi doŋ icwal dano i Jopa, wek oom Cimon ma gilwoŋo Petero. 	Now send men to Joppa to bring back a man named Simon who is called Peter.
otwogone dong Iak labongo yecce 	the grasshopper is crawling without the feathers
oputte ki lok atta mape myero 	he burst out with uncalled for words
jami pe tye ka wille maber 	things are not being well bought 
man en aye tic me olo adada 	this is tiresome work indeed
En binywalo latin awobi, ibicako nyiŋe Yecu, Pien bilaro dano ki i balgi.” 	She will give birth to a son, and you are to give him the name Jesus, because he will save his people from their sins.”
tammo pi gin ma etimmo 	reflects on what he did
ento guuro kit ma en ogamo kwede lok, ci guliŋ aliŋa. 	And astonished by his answer, they became silent.
caar wangge ki toc 	dazzle his eyes with a touch
twerro bolli i pekko mo madit 	it can throw you into very big trouble
anyira ki awobe ducu gucitto ka jwerro bar odilo lumuku 	all the girls and the boys alike went to slash the football field
til en aye lee ma tyene bocco dok pwodo ki gutte bene bor mada 	an antelope, gazelle is an animal with long slim legs and very long neck
ludito ma lakgi pe dong tek gimaarro cammo aruk dyang mada 	the elderly people with weak teeth love very much to eat the hump of cattle
panggo odilo	to dodge the ball
wee i wiye ni en aye ma okwallo 	attribute or input on him the theft
bur matye i lwetcig kello kwot pa agul gul ma i tee ywat. 	ulcer on the fingers will cause the armpit nodes or axillary lymph nodes to swell and become painful
Lwak ducu gubedo ka yenyo yo me gudo kome, pien tek onoŋo a ki i kome ci caŋogi ducu. 	and the people all tried to touch him, because power was coming from him and healing them all.
Dano gucito ka neno gin ma otimme, gubino bot Yecu, gunoŋo dano ma cen oa ki i kome-ni obedo ka tyen Yecu, oruko boŋo, odoko dano	and the people went out to see what had happened
Pi niye omiyo cel me Jeriko orette opoto woko piny ma doŋ jo Icrael gurumo pi nino abiro. 	By faith the walls of Jericho fell, after the army had marched around them for seven days.
te okono obur bong luputu	pumpkin growing wild in the old homestead site is not uprooted
lar ma tecre pe i kom gin ma pe meeri pe konynyo gin mo 	disputing about a thing which is not yours does not help at all 
Nyo icayo lonyo me kica pa Lubaŋa ki kit ma en jukke kwede pi bal pa dano, ki kit ma en diyo kwede cwinye. Adada in iŋeyo ni Lubaŋa lakica, pien teli wek iŋut i kom balli. 	So when you, a mere human being, pass judgment on them and yet do the same things, do you think you will escape God’s judgment?
Lok man bedo niŋniŋ ka jo mogo i kingi onoŋo yam gin pe lugen? Kit macalo gin pe genne-ni, man bene twero miyo Lubaŋa doko ŋat ma pe genne? 	Much in every way! First of all, the Jews have been entrusted with the very words of God.
oneno ka polo oyabbe, ki jami mo olor piny, macalo cuka madit, kun bino piny ma tye ki twoke aŋwen. 	He saw heaven opened and something like a large sheet being let down to earth by its four corners.
ywaa kom i kel cok kany 	pull the chair near here 
Ka gin ducu gumako Cocitene, ladit me kacokke, ci gigoye i nyim kom me ŋolo kop. Ento Galio pe oketo iye cwinye. 	Then the crowd there turned on Sosthenes the synagogue leader and beat him in front of the proconsul; and Gallio showed no concern whatever.
En bibedo dit, gibilwoŋe ni, Wod pa En Mamalo Twal	He will be great and will be called the Son of the Most High
cobbe ma caa meera pe ya to 'mono me kwan 	the work can be Hurdled before the time for my study  
oyiiro ringo woko ci giteddo kwee pe ocek 	he bewitched the meat and the meat could not be cooked soft
pimmo remo me nenno ka kwidi me maleriya tye iye	to examine the blood to find out if there are malaria parasites in it
pokko gin man pe tek	to distribute distributing this thing is not difficult
yel luwac kom 	bother the lazy people 
pii mol ni yak yak 	the water flows steadily on
ocammo kit lwak cam mapol mada laworo man tin dong tye ka jero gwee keken 	he ate too much many types of food yesterday and today he is just belching a very foul smel
dano ma laree lok ber mada nikatto'ngat ma jul ajulla nyo me aligga 	a humorous person is better than a sulky or a quiet person
yib ogwal peke  	the frog has no tail
anyira ki mon mapol giwotto ki mandara matitino ma ginenno kwedde wanggi ki yer wigi ka tye maber, ka gitye i kin dano 	many girls and women carry with them small looking glasses which they use to look at their faces and hair if they are neat
Ci gugwelo lutic wadgi ma i yeya mukene ni gubin gukonygi. Gubino guloko rec i yeya aryo ducu gupoŋ woko, omiyo gucako mwony. 	When they had done so, they caught such a large number of fish that their nets began to break.
juk latin pe obed ka timme atata	prevent the child from misbehaving himself
Ojara ocitto i ot yat wek gigol nyig cingge acel mukene ma olot 	Ojara went to the hospital to have the supernumenary finger removed
otwa 	our house 
Gin munen kunnu obedo marac twatwal ma miyo dano lworo, man omiyo Moses owaco ni, “Lworo omaka adada ma koma myel amyela.” 	The sight was so terrifying that Moses said, “I am trembling with fear.”
Utmegina ma amaro, wuŋe lok man. Dano acel acel myero owiny lok oyotoyot, ento pe myero orune me gamone, dok bene myero odi kinigane. 	My dear brothers and sisters, take note of this: Everyone should be quick to listen, slow to speak and slow to become angry,
Kit meno bene, wun co wubed ki monwu ki niaŋ maber, kun wumiyo deyo bot dako macalo lawoti ma kome pe tek, pien gin bene ginywako kica pa Lubaŋa kwedwa ma en aye kelo kwo. Kumeno gin mo pe ma bigeŋo legawu. 	Your beauty should not come from outward adornment, such as elaborate hairstyles and the wearing of gold jewelry or fine clothes.
geng donggi wek awiny ci inenno 	open your mouth for me to hear and you will see, in other words, he does not want him to speak
wangga yoo ma katto lokacaa tye kwene?, 	where is the road that passes over there? 
I kare ma niye peya obino, cik aye munoŋo gwokowa, kun otweyowa woko macalo mabuc, nio waŋ ma ginyuttiwa niye. 	But Scripture has locked up everything under the control of sin, so that what was promised, being given through faith in Jesus Christ, might be given to those who believe.
kwok tye ka jibbe i nyimme 	beads of sweat are coming out on his face 
Guŋolo tol ma mako lajuk ducu, guweko odoŋ i nam	Cutting loose the anchors, they left them in the sea and at the same time untied the ropes that held the rudders
bot jo ma tye i te cik pa Moses abedo bene macalo ŋat ma tye i te cik, kadi bed an kikoma pe atye i te cik, wek anoŋ jo ma tye i te cik. 	To those under the law I became like one under the law (though I myself am not under the law), so as to win those under the law.
jinno lok me pido ne	to delay his court case
dano gwokko gwok pi yoo aryo mukwonggo me gwokko gang me aryo me beddo gin ma gallo wangue wekko pe ebeddo kene 	people keep dogs for two reasons first as a home keeper second as something that must be there With them in their company while loneliness
wulok lawang acel	speak uniformly the same words, that is tell the same story 
it wii aguragura man wek irig kwede 	mount this horse so that you may ride it 
gupenynye mada  	they questioned or interrogated him very much
meny wek okwan 	light so that he may read
gid ringo man ka wek icel	cut this meat into small pieces and then fry 
kel laywee me laywee me yweyo dye kal	bring the broom for sweeping the compound of the house
Ento Luparicayo guwinyo ci guwacci, “Dano-ni ryemo cen pi twero pa beeljebul, ma en aye ladit pa cen.” 	All the people were astonished and said, “Could this be the Son of David?”
pat pat mada ma dano gitweyo i gutgi 	there are many varieties of ties which people wear or put around their necks
tin pe guguure kany 	today they did not assemble here
ka pe imitto ci yeg wii 	if you do not want shake your head 
Kiniga omako ladit twatwal oweko omiye bot askari lugwok mabuc, nio ka oculo banyane ducu. 	Shouldn’t you have had mercy on your fellow servant just as I had on you?’
lak tong man mitto apakka ka wek ocub lee maber	the edge of the knife is blunt and does not cut anything 
gutudde kacel komme 	they united together against him
akwaya bad en aye ringo ducu ma wirro pal gwok as iye ka citto makke kom coggo me dye gee 	shoulder blade is the bone where all the muscles that rotate the shoulder arise from and then go to be attached to the spinal collum bones 
cit ka myel 	go to dance 
many pa dakone rac twatwal pien binno ki arem matek 	her menstruation is very bad because it comes with very severe pain 
ryeyo bongo i wii tol	to hang the clothes on the rope
Dako ma ginyomo bene cik tweyo i kom cware ka cware pud kwo, ento ka cware doŋ oto, en gonnye woko i cik pa cware. 	Although they know God’s righteous decree that those who do such things deserve death, they not only continue to do these very things but also approve of those who practice them.
Yam pe onoŋo wugamo cwiny me bedo opii, wek wudok cen i lworo	For those who are led by the Spirit of God are the children of God.
Atye ki gen i Rwot Yecu me cwalo Temceo botwu oyot, wek omi awiny kit ma wutye kwede, kun cuko cwinya bene. 	So you too should be glad and rejoice with me.
tii matek wek i it malo i rwom me tic meeri 	work very hard so that you may climb up in rank in your job
lok terro i kot	to take up the matter in the court
gwana ma numu ka gioddo i pany ci ngit doko maliyo 	when raw cassava has been pounded well it becomes soft like pulp  
ento Paulo oyero Cira ci gua ka doŋ utmego gumiyogi i ciŋ Rwot wek okonygi ki kicane. 	but Paul chose Silas and left, commended by the believers to the grace of the Lord.
waarro jami woko ki i ot  	removing things from the house
me menyo jo ma bedo i piny macol ki i tipo me to, ki me tiro tyenwa i yo me kuc.” 	to shine on those living in darkness and in the shadow of death, to guide our feet into the path of peace.”
awobe man ducu gitye ki mecgi 	all these boys have got their clandestine girlfriends
En aye gin mumiyo jo ma gunywale guwaco ni, “En doŋ dit, wupenye.” 	His parents said this because they were afraid of the Jewish leaders, who already had decided that anyone who acknowledged that Jesus was the Messiah would be put out of the synagogue.
gwokke mada pe iteer pil wii kuno pien giryammi cut 	be very careful, do not take your arrogance there because they will send you away at once 
twol ka otii ci pok komme macon roc ci pokke woko ki ikomme ci en wotte woko ki iiye wekko orocce kenynyo ma en aye gilwongoni oroc twol 	when the snake is old its skin becomes dry and separates from its body and it pulls itself out from it, leaving it there as a shed skin
litino ma gitukko i apwa twatwal, apwa donynyo i wanggi ci kello twoo me lit wang	the hare is the animal that is used very much in the Acholi tales
Ka lwak guneno ni Yecu pe kunnu, kadi wa lupwonnyene bene, gin kikomgi guito i yeya, gucito Kapernaum ka yenyo Yecu. 	Then some boats from Tiberias landed near the place where the people had eaten the bread after the Lord had given thanks.
en tikka niang lok ma gititte 	does he really understand what he has been told?
Ka Luparicayo guneno man, guwaco bot lupwonnyene ni, “Piŋo lapwonywu camo kacel ki lujogmucoro ki lubalo?” 	While Jesus was having dinner at Matthew’s house, many tax collectors and sinners came and ate with him and his disciples.
en obitta ni wacit kwedde ka kwang i ka kwang pa cukul, ka cunno anyira cukul 	he enticed me to go with him to swim in the schools' swimmimg pool to befriend the school girls 
nyim tye ka ukke woko ki i kicaa 	the simsim is pouring out from the sack
pokko gin man pe tek 	to distribute distributing this thing is not difficult
Pe wuye ŋat mo obwolwu ki lok mogo ma tere pe, pien kiniga pa Lubaŋa bino i kom jo ma pe winyo lokke pi kit timgi nu. 	For of this you can be sure: No immoral, impure or greedy person—such a person is an idolater—has any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of God.
Alegi pi latinna Onesimo, ma doŋ adoko wonne ki i buc kany. 	Therefore, although in Christ I could be bold and order you to do what you ought to do,
man en aye mep me Apirika pien inenno iye kulo me Nail  	this is the map of Africa because you can see in it River Nile
pe ipyee apyeya i tic 	do not jump from one job to another
tamciya en aye gin ma giyarro ka gigenggo kwedde kot pe odyak wic ki kom dano dok ceng bene pe owang wic 	umbrella is the thing which is opened and used to shade off rain from wetting the head and body and also the heat of the sun on the head
moko binjali girubbu ki kamlara ki yadi mukene wa gwwecgi kuur ci dokko moko wa ngwecce kuur madaen aye dong giteddo kwedde ci miyo dek ngwecce liuttr dok ma mit mada	the ground iinneric powder is mixed with red pepper and other spices to form curry powder that has very nice aroma, which is used very much for cooking food that smells very nice and makes it very tasty and appetising
pien pe gibikwano dano mo ni kite atir pien tiyo gin ma cik mito. 	know that a person is not justified by the works of the law, but by faith in Jesus Christ
puyo wii dano 	ruling over the people in other words, become the chief
Wumotte kekenwu ki mot me mar. 	This is why I write these things when I am absent, that when I come I may not have to be harsh in my use of authority—the authority the Lord gave me for building you up, not for tearing you down.
I kare ma Yecu doŋ otyeko ciko lupwonnyene apar wiye aryo-ni, oa ki kunnu ocito ka pwony ki ka tito lok i gaŋi ma cok ki kunnu. 	After Jesus had finished instructing his twelve disciples, he went on from there to teach and preach in the towns of Galilee.
Ento Yecu odokke iye ni, “Too tye ki boro, winyo me polo bene tye ki odigi, ento Wod pa dano pe tye ki ka ma myero epyel iye wiye.” 	Then a teacher of the law came to him and said, “Teacher, I will follow you wherever you go.”
Aŋeyo ni ka ao botwu noŋo abino ki gum madit ma oa ki bot Kricito. 	So after I have completed this task and have made sure that they have received this contribution, I will go to Spain and visit you on the way.
lapena macallo ngor ci ento nyak mere dok malo ki i jang yat 	the pigeon peas is like other peas but it comes out of the branches of trees
Lacen megi litino pa Jebedayo obino bot Yecu kacel ki litino awobene, ci oguŋo piny i nyime, ci olege pi gin mo. 	Then the mother of Zebedee’s sons came to Jesus with her sons and, kneeling down, asked a favor of him.
bakala komme tek mada ka me tic nikatto agura-gura 	as regards working, a mule is stronger than a horse
oye ni nyaare ginyom 	he gave consent that his daughter be married 
kome gum calo min romo ma loko wode dako cware	she is lucky as the ewe which makes her son become her husband
macallo wakwano i Baibul ni Icaya obeddo lanebi pien otito lok mapol I anyim i kom Yecu 	as we read in the Bible that Isaiah was a prophet because he foretold many things about Jesus 
dyangi opong ni jut i kulo 	there are many cattle in the river or the river is full of cattle 
mak man pi tutuno 	hold this one for the time being 
Wun twol, litino ororo, wubibwot niŋniŋ ki i ŋolo kop me bolowu i Geena? 	Go ahead, then, and complete what your ancestors started!
tweyo ni rwit 	tying it firmly
ngeene ber	understanding each other is very good
ento wukwero bino bota, wek wulim kwo. 	These are the very Scriptures that testify about me,
Wubed ma cwinwyu leŋ, wek lewic omak jo ma yeto kitwu maber i Kricito, ka ginywarowu. 	Who is going to harm you if you are eager to do good?
Ka gubino i Jerucalem, ci Yecu odonyo i ot pa Lubaŋa, ocako ryemo lucat-wil ki luwil jami i ot pa Lubaŋa. 	On reaching Jerusalem, Jesus entered the temple courts and began driving out those who were buying and selling there
agulu pii to idogola	water pot breaks near the door
Wumi pwoc bot Lubaŋa Won ma omiyowa twer me nywako kacel ki jone maleŋ jami ducu ma en bimiyo botgi i leŋpiny. 	being strengthened with all power according to his glorious might so that you may have great endurance and patience,
lok man dong dwokowa odye mada	this matter now takes us back to the beginning
Gutero Yecu i kabedo ma gilwoŋo ni Golgota, ma te lokke ni kabedo me cogo wic. 	They brought Jesus to the place called Golgotha (which means “the place of the skull”).
Waraga man oa ki bot Paulo, latic pa Lubaŋa dok bene lakwena pa Yecu Kricito. Yam oora me nyayo niye pa jo ma Lubaŋa oyero, ki me niaŋogi i lok me ada ma rwatte ki kwo me woro Lubaŋa, 	who gave himself for us to redeem us from all wickedness and to purify for himself a people that are his very own, eager to do what is good.
leggo del ma gitweyo i pyer 	loosening the belt tied around the waist
lyet bongo man ki pac ma lyet ka we dong orukki 	warm the clothes with the hot iron so that he may wear them 
piny lyet  	the weather is hot
Ci oŋamo doge me yeto Lubaŋa, kun yeto nyiŋe ki ka ma en bedo iye, kun yeto bene wa jo ducu ma gibedo i polo. 	It opened its mouth to blaspheme God, and to slander his name and his dwelling place and those who live in heaven.
pe bot dano ducu, ento bot wan jo ma yam Lubaŋa oyero pi bedo lucaden. Wan wacamo dok wamato kwede kacel i kare ma doŋ ocer woko ki i kin jo muto. 	He was not seen by all the people, but by witnesses whom God had already chosen—by us who ate and drank with him after he rose from the dead.
iteerre pi ngoo?  	why do you take him?
Kom tye acel, Cwiny Maleŋ bene tye acel, kit macalo gen bene tye acel ma Lubana olwoŋowu iye.	Make every effort to keep the unity of the Spirit through the bond of peace.
wangge bit 	has sharp sight
jul pe myero ki nyako  	sulkiness is not good for a girl
otango ngwec ategga matek mada 	he took off at a high speed 
Kapten omako ciŋe, otere cen i muŋ ka openye ni, “Gin aŋo ma onoŋo imito tito bota?” 	The commander took the young man by the hand, drew him aside and asked, “What is it you want to tell me?”
lwak yugi man ducu twero ywekke ci teerre woko wai lum  	all the rubbish can be collected and taken away into the bush
gunywanno bonggine woko atata 	they mixed up his clothes anyhow
Odiyo cwinye i komgi i tim mwaka pyeraŋwen. 	for about forty years he endured their conduct in the wilderness;
ngido ngido mungati en aye dong odong 	only crumbs or pieces ot broken bread which is remaining
mon mapol giwekko lwetgi lot mabocco ni meno en aye me deyo 	many women leave their nails to grow long as a sign of beauty
lok ducu ma awacciwu gin aye cwiny ki kwo. 	The Spirit gives life; the flesh counts for nothing
ginywalle i nine dwee me Nobwemba abic 	he was born on the fifth of November
wucitto ka coc 	you go to write
origgo ki leela ocitto wa Lira nia ki Gulu 	he cycled to Lira from Gulu on a bicycle 
pien aŋeyo miti ma wutye kwede. Atye ka nyatte piwu mada bot jo Makedonia ni meno, “Jo Akaya guyubbe woko wa con cakke i mwaka mukato.” Pi cukke ma wubedo ka cukke kwede, omiyo polgi bene guketo cwinygi. 	There is no need for me to write to you about this service to the Lord’s people.
nyaarro wic ki magac 	to trim the hair with scissors
takko wic tegge	to move the head aside so as to avoid being hurt 
An cwinya yom, pien atye ki gen madit i komwu i yo ducu.	And his affection for you is all the greater when he remembers that you were all obedient, receiving him with fear and trembling.
Doŋ macalo wun wuloyo dano i yo ducu, i kom niye, i loko lok, i ŋec, i keto cwinywu ki i mar ma wutye kwede i komwa, ber wulo dano bene i tic man me kica. 	So we urged Titus, just as he had earlier made a beginning, to bring also to completion this act of grace on your part.
joo mene ma gitye ka wer? 	who are singing? 
obeddo ki yom cwiny mada pi katto penynye 	he was very happy or pleased to pass his examination
tye ka medde amedda ki kwoone 	increasing in theft
Yecu olokke, onenogi kun gilube, openyogi ni, “Wuyenyo aŋo?” Gin gupenye ni, “Rabbi (ma te lokke ni, Lapwony) ibedo kwene?” 	When the two disciples heard him say this, they followed Jesus.
Wuwor dano ducu. Wumar omegiwu. Wulwor Lubaŋa. Wuwor laloc madit. 	For it is God’s will that by doing good you should silence the ignorant talk of foolish people.
ladit pe loko laa ingeye nono	an elder does not turn the skin apron behind his back for nothing
ony pii opongangulu man 	fill this pot with water
en dano ma laolle mada nino ducu kello lok ata keken macallo me larro wang poto nyo dyel pa ngati ocammo gin ma epitto 	he is a very troublesome person, always brings trivial matters such as disputes about field boundaries or a goat that has eaten 
lokke pudi winynye opilo pile 	the matter is as yet a mere rumour 
I kare meno lukwena ki utmego ma gitye i Jerucalem guwinyo ni Lurok bene doŋ guye lok pa Lubaŋa. 	The apostles and the believers throughout Judea heard that the Gentiles also had received the word of God.
i kom ŋolo kop, pien laloc me lobo man doŋ giŋolle kop woko. 	Unless I go away, the Advocate will not come to you; but if I go, I will send him to you.
Pe iŋur pien awacci ni, ‘Myero ginywalwu tyen me aryo.’ 	Flesh gives birth to flesh, but the Spirit gives birth to spirit.
gitye ka willo bolo i duka kwica 	they are buying the clothes there 
Ci lutkot ocako wil awila, mor winnye matek, ki mwoc pa kot, ki oyeŋyeŋ madit oyeŋo piny, kit oyeŋyeŋ mo ma peya yam onen cakke ma dano gubedo i lobo	Then there came flashes of lightning, rumblings, peals of thunder and a severe earthquake
Onoŋo doŋ oti twatwal, pien otyeko mwaka abiro bot cware cakke i kare ma en pud nyako	She was very old; she had lived with her husband seven years after her marriage,
Ento Petero ki lukwena mukene gudok iye ni, “Myero wawiny Lubaŋa makato dano. 	Peter and the other apostles replied: “We must obey God rather than human beings!
locco ma kitmeno pe ber	that type of governance is not good 
En dok oketo nino mukene ma gilwoŋo ni, “Tin,” kun olok lacen ki i dog Daudi ma doŋ onoŋo okato kare malac ata, i lok ma nene waloko pire, ni, “Ka wuwinyo dwane tin, pe wumi cwinywu obed nwaŋ.” 	God again set a certain day, calling it “Today.” This he did when a long time later he spoke through David, as in the passage already quoted: “Today, if you hear his voice, do not harden your hearts.”
ngillo kidi madit mapek 	rolling a big heavy stone 
nenno dyang mene maber ma loyo ducu	choosing, which cattle that is better than all of them
dano mapol gilwenynyo mada pi jer 	quite a number of people fight very much for being humiliated about his tribal status
nen ka bongo dong otwoo 	see whether the clothes are dried
pitto litino ki pitto latin lakere 	feeding the children and bringing them up and nourishing the baby
litino mukene gucitto kwene 	where have the other children gone
ento i kare ducu wanyuto berwa kenwa macalo wan lutic pa Lubaŋa kun waciro matek twatwal, i can ki peko ki ayelayela ma odiyowa. 	For he says, “In the time of my favor I heard you, and in the day of salvation I helped you.” I tell you, now is the time of God’s favor, now is the day of salvation.
gwok cam i kin lwak ma ditto 	has no idea of how to eat in public with respectable people
i kare ma gijukke, obeddo piny olio ni rwee 	when he was rebuked he sat down and became silent
Agoyo jo ma an amarogi, apwonyogi dok atirogi	Those whom I love I rebuke and discipline
Lacen Yecu owaco bot ladit ma loyo askari ni, “Citi, myero otimme boti kit macalo doŋ iye kwede-ni.” Ci laticce ocaŋ woko cut i cawa meno. 	But the subjects of the kingdom will be thrown outside, into the darkness, where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.”
ento wac lok awaca keken, ci laticca bicaŋ. 	The centurion replied, “Lord, I do not deserve to have you come under my roof
corro lim madowong me willo gin mo 	paying too much money for buying something 
Meno noŋo pe doŋ wukelo apokapoka woko i kinwu kekenwu, kun wudoko bene luŋolkop ma tamwu ogom woko? 	have you not discriminated among yourselves and become judges with evil thoughts?
pien lok pa Lubaŋa ki lega lonyogi bedo maleŋ. 	They forbid people to marry and order them to abstain from certain foods, which God created to be received with thanksgiving by those who believe and who know the truth.
Pe guniaŋ ni en tye ka tittigi pi Lubaŋa Won. 	But he who sent me is trustworthy, and what I have heard from him I tell the world.”
pe ber me mono dano mo me tiyo gin me 	it is not right to force a person to do anything
ka odaŋŋe, ci mor pa kot omwoc amwoca ma romo tyen abiro kulu. 	When he shouted, the voices of the seven thunders spoke.
Kit macalo Moses yam otiŋo twol malo i tim-mi, Wod pa dano bene myero gitiŋe malo kumeno, 	No one has ever gone into heaven except the one who came from heaven—the Son of Man.
tyello dano ma onongo tye ki pekko 	supporting somebody who has problems
me leyo kabedo me tic man ki tero kwenane, ma yam Juda oweko ci olokke odok cen, odok gire i kabedone.” 	to take over this apostolic ministry, which Judas left to go where he belongs.”
toyo odyakko komme woko 	he was wet all over with dew 
ngat ma tye ki cwiny me nek pe dano me nino ducu ento wiye nonggo oballe woko, lapoya 	to all good people the idea of killings do not come into their minds
olarro bot rwot ka dot 	he ran to the chief to lodge an accusation
lak tong ojot ki remo 	the spear's edge is dripping with blood
ci apo lok ma yam Rwot owaco, ni, ‘Jon yam obatija dano ki pii, ento wun gibibatijawu ki Cwiny Maleŋ.’ 	Then I remembered what the Lord had said: ‘John baptized with water, but you will be baptized with the Holy Spirit.’
tayi aridi gibecco mada 	silk neckties are very beautiful
pien nyako-ni pe oto, ento onino anina.” 	“She is not dead but asleep.”
gwok icam cam man 	do not eat this food 
pukko cukari madowong mada i cai mere ka dong matto 	pouring a lot of sugar in his tea and then takes it 
Ka doŋ awaco ni, ‘An a ene, doŋ abino ka cobo mitini, in Lubaŋa,’ macalo yam gicoyo i koma i buk adola.” 	Then I said, ‘Here I am—it is written about me in the scroll— I have come to do your will, my God.’”
Yecu openyogi ni, “Wubedo ka pyem kwedgi pi lok aŋo?” 	“What are you arguing with them about?” he asked.
Wugwokke kenwu i mar pa Lubaŋa, wukur kica pa Rwotwa Yecu Kricito nio wa i kwo ma pe tum. 	But you, dear friends, by building yourselves up in your most holy faith and praying in the Holy Spirit,
pit yat 	plant trees
tako en aye ngat acel me dul kom matye i is callo acwiny, aduno ki olang, en tye i tung lacam ki malo ka get apika, ticce en aye me yubbo remo wek acwiny ottii kwedde 	spleen is one of the organs in the abdomen like liver, heart and kidney, its function is to disintegrate the red blood corpuscles into haemoglobin, which goes to the liver and turns it into bilirubin it has many other functions also
aparro mada kace nyo maa pud tye maber 	I worry very much if my mother is still well
ladep nyaa mada i horn gwok mape gilwokko 	the fleas multiply very much on a dong which is not washed
Iweny atata ceng mo biterri i too 	frequent fighting will one day cause you to death
Yecu odonyo i yeya oŋolo nam okato loka tuŋcel, ci obino i lobo tugi kikome. 	After Jesus and his disciples arrived in Capernaum, the collectors of the two-drachma temple tax came to Peter and asked, “Doesn’t your teacher pay the temple tax?”
Wugwokke, waŋwu obed twolo ma nen, pien wun pe wuŋeyo nino ma kare biromo iye. 	Be on guard! Be alert! You do not know when that time will come.
nyel dong mwodo ma olakki	cut the edge of the grass which has overgrown its edge
“Imito atimmi gin aŋo?” Latowaŋ ogamo ni, “Ladit, amito waŋa onen piny.” 	“What do you want me to do for you?” “Lord, I want to see,” he replied.
owacca ni en pe enenni kuno 	he told me that he did not see you there
tye ka jutto nyaare ki oluta kwon 	is beating her daughter with the stick for stirring kwon
tek ni gang 	it is exceedingly hard
Doŋ jo ma i kin likwayo pa Levi ma gubedo ajwagi, cik pa Moses yam ocikogi me jogo dul acel me apar ki bot jo Icrael. Meno onoŋo gijogo ki bot utmegigi, kadi bed gin bene gubedo likwayo pa Abraim. 	Now the law requires the descendants of Levi who become priests to collect a tenth from the people—that is, from their fellow Israelites—even though they also are descended from Abraham.
cam muranga ki ringo ci ibeddo ma kommi yot mada 	eat beans and meat so that you will be fit and very healthy 
awobe gitye ka matto kongo agaci 	the boys are drinking an imstrained beer
jami aryo ma myero etii ci man tye ka tammo mene ma myerro ekwong tiyone 	there are two things which he must do and he is now deliberating on which one he must do first
kwoo ma onyaa twatwal i boma ni twerro jwikke ka abili tye mapol 	the prevalent thefts in the town can be reduced if there are many policemen
Ŋat ma tye ki Wod tye ki kwo, ŋat ma pe ki Wod pa Lubaŋa, pe tye ki kwo. 	Whoever has the Son has life; whoever does not have the Son of God does not have life.
litino gimaarro mapera twatwal 	the children love guavas very much
Man aye ?at ma yam gicoyo lok i kome ni, “Nen, acwalo lakwenana otelo nyimi, ma bigero yoni ma peya noŋo in ibino.” 	This is the one about whom it is written: “‘I will send my messenger ahead of you, who will prepare your way before you.’
dano myerro guwiny juc pa luditto ticgi 	the people must listen to the warning from their masters
Ka lwak Lujudaya madwoŋ guniaŋ ni en tye kunnu, ci gubino, pe pi Yecu keken, ento bene pi neno Lajaro ma en ocero ki i kin jo muto. 	You will always have the poor among you, but you will not always have me.”
gin yang pe gilwenynyo atata 	they used not to fight
En mumiyo dako myero obed ki lanyut me twero i wiye, pi lumalaika. 	It is for this reason that a woman ought to have authority over her own head, because of the angels.
gipito yatte nyigi-nyigi dok twatwal 	the trees were planted too closely together 
Ento Petero ocwalogi ducu woko, ka orumo coŋe piny ocako lega. Lacen olokke bot lato kun wacci “Tabica, a malo.” Ci Tabica oyabo waŋe	Peter sent them all out of the room; then he got down on his knees and prayed
anyira mapol pou nonggo gitye i kin mwaka 14 ki 15, mukene acel acelle pong ma nonggo mwaka bene pud peya orommo 14 	most girls become fully grown and mature (as characterised by the presence of menses) between the ages of 14 and 15, other few ones become fully grown when they have not yet reached 14
wek ocitti 	let him go 
lak tongge dit, pe twerro roone i akura man 	the blade of the spear is very big, it cannot be inserted into this sheath
obeddo ka legga i kanica naka nioo ka piny oruu 	he stayed in the church praying until break of day
nang kic nyo moo ya bene 	lick honey or shea nut butter
Pien kadi omegine kikome bene pe guye en. 	Jesus’ brothers said to him, “Leave Galilee and go to Judea, so that your disciples there may see the works you do.
Lucamaria mapol ma i gaŋ meno guye en pi lok pa dako, ma owaco ni, “Otitta gin ducu ma yam atiyo.” 	Others have done the hard work, and you have reaped the benefits of their labor.”
Ento i kom lok man me cer ki i kin jo muto-ni, wun pe mukwano i buk pa Moses, ka ma ocoyo lok i kom caka, ki kit ma Lubaŋa yam oloko kwede ni, ‘An Lubaŋa pa Abraim, ki Lubaŋa pa Icaka, ki Lubaŋa pa Yakobo’? 	Now about the dead rising—have you not read in the Book of Moses, in the account of the burning bush, how God said to him, ‘I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob’?
pe imoo bongo ne i ceng ma lyet twatwal pien warro ragine woko 	do not put the clothe in the hot bright sun because it will bleach it or the colour will fade away 
Pe wuŋeyo ni wan ducu ma gityeko batijawa me donyo i Kricito onoŋo gibatijawa me donyo i tone? 	By no means! We are those who have died to sin; how can we live in it any longer?
caa or cawa adii? 	what is the time? 
joo mene bene ma gimitto citto ka jom? 	which people also want to go to take baths? 
Onoŋo oporre kakare pi jami ma obedo lapor keken me gin ma tye i polo myero gilonygi gubed leŋ kit meno, ento jami me polo kikomgi myero olony ki gitum mabeco makato magi-gu ducu. 	It was necessary, then, for the copies of the heavenly things to be purified with these sacrifices, but the heavenly things themselves with better sacrifices than these.
ocuur otuk okatto ni riu 	an eagle flew swiftly past away 
Juda kacel ki Cira, ma gin bene lutit lok pa Lubaŋa, gucuko cwiny utmego ki lwak lok mapol ma miyogi teko. 	Judas and Silas, who themselves were prophets, said much to encourage and strengthen the believers.
dano me Racia yang gubeddo kommwuniciti 	the Russian people were at one time communists
gibigure woko i kom yatariya, ento bicer woko i ŋe nino adek.” 	On the third day he will be raised to life!”
Pien lubwol dano mapol gitye guket woko i lobo, jo ma pe tuco ni Yecu Kricito obino kun tye ki kom dano	As you have heard from the beginning, his command is that you walk in love.
Ento Yecu oŋeyo lok man, ci owaco botgi ni, “Wuyelo dako-ni piŋo? En otiyo gin maber twatwal i koma. 	Aware of this, Jesus said to them, “Why are you bothering this woman? She has done a beautiful thing to me.
ka ngat ma cammo cukari madowong twatwal ci nonggo twoo cukari  	if one eats too much sugar he gets 'sugar disease', diabetes
nek bura man woko ma makko gwenoni 	kill this cat which attacks the chicken
daktar owacce ni ocam akuri akuri wek pe onog arem me ic	the doctor advised him that he should eat small food at frequent intervals as the doves so that he may not get abdominal pain
Wumot utmego ducu ki mot me mar. 	Greet all God’s people with a holy kiss.
bongo tye ka woo i ceng 	the clothes are getting partially dry in the sun 
mon guterro belgi ka dinnone i wii larro wek kweyo obed pe iye 	the women took their corn to thresh it on the flat stone so that there may not be sand in it
Pien wan ducu myero wacuŋ i nyim Kricito wek oŋol kop i komwa, wek dano acel acel onoŋ gin mutiko en, ma lubo kit ma yam otiyo kun tye i kom, ka ber nyo ka rac. 	So we make it our goal to please him, whether we are at home in the body or away from it.
onoŋo bene tye ki nyiŋ mo ma gigoro ma ŋat mo pe ŋeyo, kono en keken gire aye ŋeyo. 	He has a name written on him that no one knows but he himself.
otong tong en aye lwango ma kobo twoo anino i kom dano, kayo ngat ma tye ki kwidi me twoo meno, ci terro kayo ki ngat mukene ci gullo kwkii meno i komme 	tsetse fly is the fly that transmits the disease from one person to another, it bites a person with the parasites and carries them and goes and bites another person and discharges the parasites to him
kadi bed yam abedo ka yete pi keto ayela i kome ki balo nyiŋe. Ento en otima kica, pien ceŋ atimo meno ki kwiya piny laboŋo niye, 	I thank Christ Jesus our Lord, who has given me strength, that he considered me trustworthy, appointing me to his service.
Pien dano ma tiyo gin ma Wora ma tye i polo mito, meno aye omera ki lamera, ki maa bene”	Pointing to his disciples, he said, “Here are my mother and my brothers.
Man omiyo wudoko lanen bot jo ducu muye Yecu ma gitye i Makedonia ki Akaya. 	And so you became a model to all the believers in Macedonia and Achaia.
bki i pii 	soak in the water
man jane pa agaa  	whose slave is this?
Caden meno tye ada	One of Crete’s own prophets has said it: “Cretans are always liars, evil brutes, lazy gluttons.”
obuga donggo yadi mogo ma cengo cengo, nyigge bene tino mada makatto nyig kal, ento potte ka giteddo yom dok mit bene mada 	obuga plants which grow to very short height, have very tiny seeds smaller than those of millet, but their leaves when cooked, make very nice sauce 
Jo ma gunywale gudok iye ni, “Waŋeyo ni man latinwa, dok yam ginywale ma waŋe oto. 	They still did not believe that he had been blind and had received his sight until they sent for the man’s parents.
En orwatte ki Abraim i kare ma Abraim onoŋo doŋ dwogo ki ka neko luker ca, ci cut olamo gum i kom Abraim	He met Abraham returning from the defeat of the kings and blessed him,
Ceŋ me ada ma menyo dano ducu onoŋo oebino i lobo. 	He himself was not the light; he came only as a witness to the light.
awillo ki kwokka, ot ma atye abeddo iye ni 	I bought with my sweat, the house in which I am now staying
bak kal madowong i dero me kurro kec I mwaka mabinno 	store a large amount of millet in the barn for use during the famine next year
for dul yen man icwal piny kwica 	roll this log of wood and push it down there
aruddo opunynya ma okakki ki kkii agwaya ci man dong odoko ma pwot 	I rubbed my cracked heels with a rough stone 
lokke pe twerro bokke tum 	the story cannot be completely narrated
Gin ma awaco en aye ni, dano acel acel i kinwu tyeka waco ni, “An dano pa Paulo,” nyo ni “An dano pa Kepa,” “An dano pa Apolo,” “An dano pa Kricito.” 	What I mean is this: One of you says, “I follow Paul”; another, “I follow Apollos”; another, “I follow Cephas”; still another, “I follow Christ.”
iwinyo dwane, ento pe iŋeyo ka ma oa iye, nyo ka ma dok iye	The wind blows wherever it pleases
Waŋeyo ni, ŋat mucero Rwotwa Yecu bicerowa bene kacel ki Yecu, ci bikelowa i nyime kacel kwedwu. 	It is written: “I believed; therefore I have spoken.” Since we have that same spirit of faith, we also believe and therefore speak,
remo jotto lak tong noggo gicubbo ki gin mo matye ki remo 	the edge of the spear gets smeared with blood when it is speared with anything that has blood
latin man lapelle mada 	this is a restless and unruly child 
Ka Yecu doŋ oo loka nam tuŋcel, i lobo pa Lugadara, cutcut jo aryo ma cen maraco tye i komgi gurwatte kwede	The men were amazed and asked, “What kind of man is this? Even the winds and the waves obey him!”
Doŋ aketo deyo i komi i lobo, kun acobo tic ma ceŋ imiya me atiya. 	Now this is eternal life: that they know you, the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom you have sent.
En odok paco, ci onoŋo latin tye obuto i wi kitanda, ma cen doŋ otyeko a woko ki i kome. 	She went home and found her child lying on the bed, and the demon gone.
Ci ka atiyo gin ma pe amito-ni, meno doŋ noŋo pe an aye ma atiyo, ento noŋo bal ma bedo i iya aye tiyo. 	For I do not do the good I want to do, but the evil I do not want to do—this I keep on doing.
ka wumitto billone abilla keken ci amiiniwu	if you only want to taste it, then I shall give you
guyenye i kin lutugi ki i kin luwotgi	Then they began looking for him among their relatives and friends.
I kare ma doŋ gicok o i Jerucalem, gubino i Betepage, i kor got Jeituni. Ci Yecu ooro lupwonnyene aryo, 	because he taught as one who had authority, and not as their teachers of the law.
Lwak madwoŋ twatwal gucokke bote, omiyo en odonyo i yeya ci obedo iye, lwak ducu gucuŋ i wi tura. 	Such large crowds gathered around him that he got into a boat and sat in it, while all the people stood on the shore.
olik gulyerre ni gogo i wii yat caa 	the bats are hanging all over the trees over there
man pudi abworre keken	this is just the introduction 
Ento, nen, ŋat ma bidoba ciŋe tye kacel kweda i dog cam. 	But the hand of him who is going to betray me is with mine on the table.
nanga gigoyo ka anyira myello kwedde nyo awobi mape ya onyommo goyo me parro kwedde nonggo dako 	nanga is played for the girls to dance or a bachelor plays it as a comfort while searching for a wife 
Ento wucit wutit ki lupwonnyene, ki bot Petero bene ni, en doŋ tye ka wot me telo nyimwu wa i Galilaya kuca	But go, tell his disciples and Peter, ‘He is going ahead of you into Galilee
tye ka pkido banya ne bot I otto 	he is demanding payment of his debt from Otto
arum buto kec kom bonyo	the ground horn-bill sleeps hungry inspite of a swarm of locusts
Dok onoŋo waneni awene ka komi lit nyo ka itye i mabuc, ci walimi?’ 	When did we see you sick or in prison and go to visit you?’
lapwonynye maber nen nino ducu kitte ma beddo kwedde 	a good student can be seen by how he behaves
i it in the ear i ologo 	in the bladder (urinary bladder) 
acikari giwotto ma giwitto badgi 	soldiers walk swinging their arms
litino gitye ka peny 	the children are in (writing) examinations 
Kit meno, niye kene ka pe giketo i tic, doŋ oto woko. 	In the same way, faith by itself, if it is not accompanied by action, is dead.
Atito botwu ni pe wubinena nio ka wubiwacci, ‘Gipwo ŋat ma bino i nyiŋ Rwot!’ ”	Look, your house is left to you desolate.
yoo ma aa ki woko pa mon ma citto i ot nyodo ma cuun donynyo iye i kare me ngotte 	a passage from the outside of a woman to the womb through which the penis passes during sexual intercourse 
Ka jo mukene apar guwinyo lokke, ci cwinygi ocwer mada i kom omego aryo-nu. 	When the ten heard about this, they were indignant with the two brothers.
Lacen owaco botgi ni, “Man aye lokka ma yam aloko botwu i kare ma onoŋo pud atye kwedwu, ni, lok ducu ma gicoyo i koma i cik pa Moses, ki i lunebi, ki i jabuli myero ocobbe kakare.” 	and he took it and ate it in their presence.
Dano-nu opennye kekene ki i cwinye ni, ‘Abitimo aŋo, pien pe atye ki ka onyo bella?’ 	He thought to himself, ‘What shall I do? I have no place to store my crops.’
cwinynye pukke me timmo gin mo 	there is a strong impelling feeling which seems to urge him to do something
gucitto ka pwonno ocunga i pap got 	they went to pick ocunga from the side of the mountain
gigoyo ma komme ducu obiri woko 	he was beaten so much that all the body is swollen
Yecu olokke, ka onene owacce ni, “Di cwinyi nyara	She said to herself, “If I only touch his cloak, I will be healed.”
Olwoŋowu i man ki lok me kwena maber ma watito, wek gimi wunoŋ deyo pa Rwotwa Yecu Kricito. 	He called you to this through our gospel, that you might share in the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ.
nyim tika twerro lyakke i kidi man 	can simsim paste be ground very smoothly on this stone?
Wun doŋ kombeddi wudoko ot ma gigero, ma gutine obedo lukwena ki lutit lok pa Lubaŋa. Yecu Kricito kikome obedo got madit me twoke. 	For through him we both have access to the Father by one Spirit.
‘An Lubaŋa pa Abraim, ki Lubaŋa pa Icaka, ki Lubaŋa pa Yakobo’? En pe Lubaŋa pa jo muto, ento Lubaŋa pa jo makwo.” 	But about the resurrection of the dead—have you not read what God said to you,
mitti madowong twatwal me cam biteerri oyot oyot mada i ngom 	glutony for eating, will take you very quickly into the ground 
ladit tye ka nyatto lok mada pi jami ne 	the old man is complaining very much about his things
odilo ogem woko i wii yat  	the football got caught up on the branch of a tree
e ee man konodok gin angoo? 	oh oh, what is the matter again?
lworro goyo kero woko me tiyo gin mo 	fear paralyses or enervates the body to do something 
Pe wuŋeyo ni dano ma ribbe ki malaya doko kom acel kwede? Pien “gin aryonu gibidoko kom acel,” macalo yam gicoyo. 	Do you not know that he who unites himself with a prostitute is one with her in body? For it is said, “The two will become one flesh.”
Ento jo mogo ma guye ma gitye i dul pa Lubaparicayo gua malo bene kun giwaco ni, “Myero koŋ gilirgi, ki cikogi ni gumak cik pa Moses.” 	Then some of the believers who belonged to the party of the Pharisees stood up and said, “The Gentiles must be circumcised and required to keep the law of Moses.”
wot tek mada i yoo matye pony- pony 	it is very difficult to walk on the road which is uneven, full of potholes
unne me gerro otte kene 	suffering to build his house alone
twora nene acitti man kono atye maber 	I wish I had gone, now I would be much better 
ologo obeddo macallo opoko ma lac kong kwoggo peg iye ki i is kuno ka lacen dong gilayo woko 	bladder is like a gourd bottle where the urine is first collected and then later it is micturated out
pi meno oito i yeya, obedo iye i dye nam, lwak ducu gubedo i witura. 	The crowd that gathered around him was so large that he got into a boat and sat in it out on the lake, while all the people were along the shore at the water’s edge.
olokko i mung botte 	he spoke in secret to him 
akwotta tyen pa latinni twerro takke ka giteerro bot ajwaka? 	can the swelling of the leg of this child be removed magically if taken by the traditional healer? 
otyekko pyello odwel i dye ot ki welo 	she has already laid down the hides on the ground for the guests 
Ci dwan ocako winnye ma a ki i polo kun wacci, In aye i Woda ma amaro, ma cwinya yom i komi. 	And a voice came from heaven: “You are my Son, whom I love; with you I am well pleased.”
En meno gin mumiyo cwinywa tek, kun wawaco ni, “Rwot en lakony mera, pe abibedo ki lworo	So we say with confidence, “The Lord is my helper; I will not be afraid
kadi wa kombeddi bene pud pe wuromo camo cam matek, 	Indeed, you are still not ready.
Pien lok ma wakelo pe oa ki i tam mugom nyo tam ma pe leŋ, goba bene pe iye. 	For the appeal we make does not spring from error or impure motives, nor are we trying to trick you.
I ŋe dwe adek wamedo wotwa i mel mo mua ki i Alegijanderia ma tye ki cal Rudi i nyime, ma odikke i cula meno pi kare me koyo. 	After three months we put out to sea in a ship that had wintered in the island—it was an Alexandrian ship with the figurehead of the twin gods Castor and Pollux.
gin ma twerro poyo wiye me coyo waraga diki 	something that will remind him tomorrow to write the letter
ringo ka giteddo ki abacala miyo ngwecce kuur mada 	when meat is cooked with onion, it gives very nice flavour
ganggi tye Alero 	their home is at Alero
wek gubed ka yenyo Lubaŋa, wek ka giboŋo aboŋa gwok nyo gugud kome ci ginoŋe, pien en pe tye cen ka mabor ki bot ŋat acel acel i kinwa. 	God did this so that they would seek him and perhaps reach out for him and find him, though he is not far from any one of us.
piny ma lyet twatwal nyogno kom dano woko 	very hot weather enervates people's bodies 
Wun lutic, myero wuwiny luditowu me lobo man i lok ducu ki cwiny acel, pe i tic ma bwolo waŋ dano keken, kun wumito wuyom cwiny dano, ento wuti i cwiny me lworo Rwot. 	Fathers, do not embitter your children, or they will become discouraged.
En openyogi cawa mene ma twone ocako dok cen. Gin gugamo ni, “Laworo cawa abiro aye lyeto oa ki i kome.” 	While he was still on the way, his servants met him with the news that his boy was living.
ngati mo nakanen obinno kany 	somebody came here a while ago 
gin ma kit meno pe nen kany 	a thing like that does not occur here 
Ka gunoŋe loka nam tuŋ ca, gupenye ni, “Lapwony, ibino kany awene?” 	Once the crowd realized that neither Jesus nor his disciples were there, they got into the boats and went to Capernaum in search of Jesus.
cwiny kadone ki kwon 	touch the salt with millet bread
Ka dako mo bene tye ki cware ma pe oye Yecu, ka ce cware oye me medde ki bedo kwede, pe myero okwere. 	And if a woman has a husband who is not a believer and he is willing to live with her, she must not divorce him.
gurokko lyec ki tong mape wacce 	they speared the elephant over and over
latin dong lye ka mokko cukari caa 	the child is eating the sugar there 
Gitwero waco ni yam ayako lwak pa Kricito ka mukene piwu, pien ceŋ agamo lim ki botgi pi ticca botwu. 	Was it a sin for me to lower myself in order to elevate you by preaching the gospel of God to you free of charge?
tii cai wek amatti 	pour some tea so that I take it
man ducu jammi me acokka	all these things are for gathering
Doŋ danona ma kite atir bibedo kwo pi niye	And, “But my righteous one will live by faith
ni otim ber oye cwale i Jerucalem, kun onoŋo guyubo ni dano gibikiye ci gineke woko i waŋa yo. 	They requested Festus, as a favor to them, to have Paul transferred to Jerusalem, for they were preparing an ambush to kill him along the way.
but ataro nyo but atataro 	lie with your face upwards or lie on your back
muni gugerro tayangi i get got 	the Europeans built their rest camp near the hill 
Lok i kom Rwot omedde oromo lobo meno ducu. 	The word of the Lord spread through the whole region.
dyewor bibino ma ŋat mo pe twero tic. 	As long as it is day, we must do the works of him who sent me
coyo ki cingge acam	he writes with his left hand
Gin ducu ma wutimo, wuti ki mar. 	Do everything in love.
atudu eimaarro lwokke mada i pii ci pieno La imitto noggogi ci cit i dong kulo 	the ducks love to swim very much in the river, therefore, if you want to see them, go to the river bank 
dano pe twerro cwee ka pe cammo cam ma mote tye 	a person cannot become fat unless he eats nutritious food 
obeddo ka perro lok owekko dek owang woko i keno 	she was talking too much and left the food which she was cooking to burn
Pi meno wan ka wacokke waneno ni ber wayer dano wacwalgi botwu kacel ki Barnaba ki Paulo, ma wamarogi twatwal, 	So we all agreed to choose some men and send them to you with our dear friends Barnabas and Paul—
ngoo cam mogo odong ki litino, leave some food for the children.	the one who remains at home, when others are going to hunt, is a coward 
dano gitye ka ywekke me citto ka nenno odilo 	the people are gathering to go to watch the football march 
en kit ma Lubaŋa kwano ki dano ni kite atir pi niyene i kom Yecu Kricito, dok bene tye pi jo ducu ma ye en. 	Now we know that whatever the law says, it says to those who are under the law, so that every mouth may be silenced and the whole world held accountable to God.
pok yat man twerro wanynye 	the bark of this wood can be peeled
en ngeyo tekko kongo waragi maber mada 	he knows how to distribute waragi very well
Pien i kom Kricito ma odoko dano-ni en aye Lubaŋa opoŋ iye kit ma etye kwede i yo ducu. 	See to it that no one takes you captive through hollow and deceptive philosophy, which depends on human tradition and the elemental spiritual forces of this world rather than on Christ.
bamme i komgi ka imitto wot 	join them if you want to go 
bongone twerro ngabbe malo	the cloth can be hung up
luduku dok tye ka mwoc tung piny kwica, pe wanngeyo gin angoo ma gitye ka cellone 	there are bursting ot gun fires down there, we do not know what they are shooting 
camme twerro tinne 	the food can be eaten sparingly 
ka pe dong itti otuc ci ibinenno 	if you don't listen you will see 
Ka oteka ma oruko jami lwennye ducu tye ka gwoko gaŋ kalle, jamine ducu bedo ki kuc, 	“When a strong man, fully armed, guards his own house, his possessions are safe.
Lok ma wuloko, ki gin ma wutiyo, myero obed macalo pa jo ma gibiŋolo kop botgi i te cik ma kelo kuc. 	Speak and act as those who are going to be judged by the law that gives freedom,
pi pacona 	for my home
Ci gutweye gutere gumiye bot Pilato ma onoŋo laloc i kare meno. 	Early in the morning, all the chief priests and the elders of the people made their plans how to have Jesus executed.
Ci gudaŋŋe, guwo ki dwangi matek ma gidino itgi woko, ci gucorre i kome kacel. 	At this they covered their ears and, yelling at the top of their voices, they all rushed at him,
ryeb atabone aryebba i wii meja 	put upside down the bowl on the table 
nyim obakke ni jut caa i cuk ma gitye ka cattone 	there is plenty of simsim in the market 
man en aye motoka ma myerro ki in 	this is a car which is suitable for you
Pien cik ducu giribogi woko i lok acel keken ni, “Mar lawoti macalo imarre keni.” 	But do not use your freedom to indulge the flesh; rather, serve one another humbly in love.
pien jo mapol gugito but limgi madwoŋ-ŋi aye gubolo, ento en i canne-ni, obolo limme ducu ma en tye kwede ma onoŋo konyo kwone.”	They all gave out of their wealth; but she, out of her poverty, put in everything—all she had to live on.”
litino myero gitiyo gin ma illo wii paco 	children should do something that gives the family a good name
cwinynye rac 	he is very bitter
Ka Yecu oneno lwak dano orume woko dyere, ci owaco ni myero gukat loka nam tuŋcel. 	This was to fulfill what was spoken through the prophet Isaiah: “He took up our infirmities and bore our diseases.”
Rom ki dano ma ogero ot ma okwinyo matut, ma ocibo guti i kom pata got	They are like a man building a house, who dug down deep and laid the foundation on rock
pe imoo kitambarani woko pien yamo dunynyo ci citto gem woko i wii yat 	don't dry your handkerchief outside because the wind will blow it up the tree and it will get caught up there 
kot cwer ni raba raba 	it rains sparsely and unevenly
jak jang yat caa 	pull off the branch of that tree
Otittigi ni “Cabit giketo pi dano, pe dano aye giieto pi cabit. 	Then he said to them, “The Sabbath was made for man, not man for the Sabbath.
labwor mwodo yago	a lion eats sausage fruit
Adok iye botgi ni, pe kitwa wan Luroma me miyo dano mo i ciŋ ludote ma peya gimiye kare me cuŋ i nyimgi waŋ ki waŋ wek opid pidone i kom lok ma gidote iye. 	“I told them that it is not the Roman custom to hand over anyone before they have faced their accusers and have had an opportunity to defend themselves against the charges.
yamo dong opyee 	the wind has calm down
ka imitto ngeyo lok mo maber ci myerro igee guramane 	if you want to know well a certain language you must know its grammar
I kare meno lupwonnye apar wiye acel gucito i Galilaya, i wi got ma yam en ocikogi ni gucit iye. 	And this story has been widely circulated among the Jews to this very day.
lacoo ma lawangge arii en aye obinno kany laworo 	a man with a squinted eye came here yesterday
ka dok onyomme ki laco mukene noŋo pe otimo abor. 	So then, if she has sexual relations with another man while her husband is still alive, she is called an adulteress
bye orokke  	it is hollow inside
jang yat tye ka lot mada	the tree is sprouting many branches
Ka piny oru, Lujudaya gutudo doggi kacel kun gikwoŋo ni pe gibicamo cam kadi wa mato pii nio ka gineko Paulo. 	The next morning some Jews formed a conspiracy and bound themselves with an oath not to eat or drink until they had killed Paul.
royo tol ma gituddo i gutte	to insert his head into a noose of rope
jollo ic ki tol 	tying the abdomen with string 
nek agulu ki awal ducu matye i ot kany ma dong gutyer woko 	destroy all the pots and the calabash bowls in the house which are already broken
pet kitanda me butto 	prepare the bed for us to sleep, in other words, spread the sheets and blanket on the bed for sleeping 
nen wanggi ma ogollo 	look at your eyes which are sunken
tummo romo 	sacrificing sheep by killing it
waraga me acoya tye kwene? 	where is the writing pad? 
pol lokke ducu goba keken 	most of his words are lies only 
Pe tye ŋatti mo ma dabo boŋo manyen i kom ginaruka muti. Pien kiraka biyec woko ki i kom ginaruka, ci waŋ boŋo yec medde nen marac. 	Jesus answered, “How can the guests of the bridegroom mourn while he is with them? The time will come when the bridegroom will be taken from them; then they will fast.
Man en kwo ma pe tum, ni giŋe in Lubaŋa acel me ada, ki Yecu Kricito ma yam ioro. 	For you granted him authority over all people that he might give eternal life to all those you have given him.
ngati moni onekko kikopo woke  	someone broke the cup
Pien amaro kwano cik pa Lubaŋa, kun alwodo lokke ki iya. 	So I find this law at work: Although I want to do good, evil is right there with me.
dakone lacaarro  	she is a loose woman
coo mapol maarro mon ma gutgi oyonne 	many men like women with long and thin necks 
litino gimaaro nanggo cwaa mada 	the children love very much to suck tamarind fruits, 
Yecu odok iye botgi ni, “Man en tic pa Lubaŋa, ni wubed ki niye i kom ŋat ma en ooro.” 	Then they asked him, “What must we do to do the works God requires?”
Lubaŋa kwanogi ni kitgi atir nono, miyogi macalo mot pi kicane pi kit ma Yecu okokogi kwede. 	for all have sinned and fall short of the glory of God,
gwok tye ka cucce woko caa mitto tinggo ringo ma gitye ka tallone ni 	the dog is hanging around outside there and wants to take away the meat which is being smoked
motoka opotto i wii kulo ci jami ducu ma iwiye oo woko i pii 	the car overturned into the river and all the things on it poured into water
dyegi gubakke ni rim i poto 	a large number of goats gathered in the field 
wacittu ka botto poto 	let us go to cultivate toughly the field
nyatto lok 	speaking incessantly about something
royo nget gang 	to fire grass round the home to prevent fire burning the home
bao ni en twero golle iye aryo 	this sheet of wood can be cut into two
En okwoŋo noŋo ominne Cimon, owacce ni, “Watyeko noŋo Meciya” (ma te lokke ni, Kricito). 	Andrew, Simon Peter’s brother, was one of the two who heard what John had said and who had followed Jesus.
Ka gucikogi ni koŋ gukat woko ki i Lukiko, ci guyubo lok kekengi, 	So they ordered them to withdraw from the Sanhedrin and then conferred together.
Meno gin jo ma bedo kar ŋur aŋura, ma gipyem apyema, kun gilubo mitgi keken, doggi opoŋ ki loko lok me wakke keken, gidworo dano wek ginoŋ gin ma cwinygi mito. 	to judge everyone, and to convict all of them of all the ungodly acts they have committed in their ungodliness, and of all the defiant words ungodly sinners have spoken against him.”
cob gin ma itye ka timmoni oyot oyot ka dong ibin 	finish what you are doing quickly and then come 
lokke tye ka ryatjgo cwinynye 	the matter is alarming or terrifying him 
wek ka twerre ao wa i cer ki i kin jo muto. 	I want to know Christ—yes, to know the power of his resurrection and participation in his sufferings, becoming like him in his death,
yab wangwa 	open our eyes
cittu ka ryeyo i tyeng 	go to line up 
dyel man twerro catte oyot oyot mada 	this can be sold well
Wun kikomwu aye doŋ wubedo waraga me pakowa, ma gicoyo i cwinywa, ma dano ducu gitwero ŋeyo dok gikwano. 	Are we beginning to commend ourselves again? Or do we need, like some people, letters of recommendation to you or from you?
piki piki en aye leela ma ringo ki cuma me mac 	motorcycle is a cycle that is rkiden by an engine 
gin tye ka daa mada 	they are quarrelling very much 
larot piny ma okwonggo oo i Acoli kany en aye Speke 	the first explorer to arrive here in Acholi is Speke
Utmegina ma amaro, pe wuwek gibwolwu. 	Don’t be deceived, my dear brothers and sisters.
I kit yo acel-lu tye jo mogo i kare man ma gudoŋ, ma Lubaŋa oyerogi pi kicane. 	And what was God’s answer to him? “I have reserved for myself seven thousand who have not bowed the knee to Baal.”
tonggo kiteya 	eating with the children
gwello moo ka wirro ki komme 	takes the oil with his fingers and then smears the body with it
mwaka me ditte mito romo apar wiye aryo. I kare ma Yecu tye ka wot, lwak odiye. 	As Jesus was on his way, the crowds almost crushed him.
ka lakko bongo tye kwica 	the place for rinsing the clothes is there
olara kit meno ki i dog labwor. 	But the Lord stood at my side and gave me strength, so that through me the message might be fully proclaimed and all the Gentiles might hear it
tye ka yikko dwanne ka wek cwer maber 	he is preparing his voice so that he may sing
Ka onoŋo en tye ka lega kaikene, kun lupwonnyene bene tye kacel kwede, en openyogi ni, “Dano mono giwacci an aŋa?” 	Once when Jesus was praying in private and his disciples were with him, he asked them, “Who do the crowds say I am?”
dok bene pe wumi kare ki Catan.	and to put on the new self, created to be like God in true righteousness and holiness.
Ento Paulo okoko apil ni myero gigwoke i mabuc pi kuro ŋolo kop pa laloc madit ma won deyo-ni. Ci aciko ni gigwoke nio ka abicwale bot Cecar.” 	But when Paul made his appeal to be held over for the Emperor’s decision, I ordered him held until I could send him to Caesar.”
Maliam openyo lamalaika ni, “Lok man bibedo niŋniŋ, ma kun an pe aŋene ki laco?” 	“How will this be,” Mary asked the angel, “since I am a virgin?”
mon gucitto ka lubbo kor nyaargi ma opoor woko ki lacoo 	the women went to pursue their daughter who has eloped with a man
Ocen dong otimmo langora otte ma mitto gerrone 	such a confirmed liar can throw you into trouble if you listen to him
Gituco balgi, ci en batijagi i kulu Jordan. 	People went out to him from Jerusalem and all Judea and the whole region of the Jordan.
Pien in doŋ iwacci, “An alony, doŋ atye ki gin ducu ma miyo abedo ki kwo maber, gin mo pe ma doki amito.” Ento kun pe iŋeyo ni in aye ŋat ma piny doŋ oloyo atika, ma imiyo kica mako dano i komi twatwal, in lacan, waŋi oto woko, dok bene ibedo munero. 	You say, ‘I am rich; I have acquired wealth and do not need a thing.’ But you do not realize that you are wretched, pitiful, poor, blind and naked.
oda kongo dong gionynyo woko 	the beer left from yesterday has been poured away 
Dano ma gicaŋo pe ŋeyo ŋat ma ocaŋe, pien onoŋo Yecu ocito gire woko, lwak onoŋo opoŋ kunnu. 	So they asked him, “Who is this fellow who told you to pick it up and walk?”
gucitto ka myel 	they went to dance 
kikoba wek akwoo ki gunia man ka ma oyecci 	bring me a piece of cloth so that I may patch with it the torn part of the gunny bag
oyoggo wii kadone manok doki i kare madong giwilo 	he added a little more to the salt after it had already been bought
“Ka wumaro dano ma marowu, pwoc aŋo ma wulimo iye? Pien lubalo bene maro jo ma marogi. 	“If you love those who love you, what credit is that to you? Even sinners love those who love them.
Pien marri okella yomcwiny, dok ojiŋo cwinya, omera, pien ikweyo cwiny jo pa Lubaŋa. 	I pray that your partnership with us in the faith may be effective in deepening your understanding of every good thing we share for the sake of Christ.
Meno aye ka ma jo pa Lubaŋa myero gunyut iye kit ma giciro kwede can, gin jo ma gwoko cik pa Lubaŋa ki niyegi i kom Yecu Kricito. 	This calls for patient endurance on the part of the people of God who keep his commands and remain faithful to Jesus.
I nino-nu kikome jo aryo ki i kingi onoŋo nene gicito i paco ma gilwoŋo ni Emau, ma mito romo mairo abiro ki i Jerucalem, 	But they did not believe the women, because their words seemed to them like nonsense.
ogwit en aye gin mulugge ma pwot matye i dong tun ma malo ma deg doko madit I kare me ngotte 	clitoris is a round structure in the upper angle of the vagina that gets enlarged during the sexual intercourse
gutuuro cul madit I wiye 	they levied a heavy fine on him or he was heavily fined
Dok ki tuŋcel waneno ni, jo ma jogo dul acel me apar gin jo ma to woko, ento ki tuŋcel ŋat ma jogo en ŋat ma yam gicoyo lok i kome ni pud kwo. 	In the one case, the tenth is collected by people who die; but in the other case, by him who is declared to be living.
odilo komme olungge 	the ball is round
wod pa Cimeon, wod pa Juda, wod pa Yucepu, wod pa Yonam, wod pa Eliakim, 	the son of Simeon, the son of Judah, the son of Joseph, the son of Jonam, the son of Eliakim,
Ka dok aneno, ci awinyo ocur mo tye ka koko ki dwan maloŋo,, i kare ma onoŋo en tye ka tuk i dye yamo kun kok ni, “Can, can, can i wi jo ma bedo i lobo, pi dwan tum mukene ma pud gudoŋ ma lumalaika adek doŋ gicok kutone!”	As I watched, I heard an eagle that was flying in midair call out in a loud voice: “Woe! Woe! Woe to the inhabitants of the earth, because of the trumpet blasts about to be sounded by the other three angels!”
pien onoŋo yam tye ki nyare ma onywalo acel keken ma onoŋo doŋ cok to	because his only daughter, a girl of about twelve, was dying
diki wang caa, next year 	tin wangi, this time
Ka pe kumeno, miyo ka ocibo guti, ma tyekone oloye woko, dano ducu ma gibineno gibicako ŋale, 	For if you lay the foundation and are not able to finish it, everyone who sees it will ridicule you,
bolle ki twon nyero mape wace 	burst with great laughter
ci wugony, wek wukel. 	Untie it and bring it here.
man poto ma pud gipurro bot 	this is the field, which has just been freshly cultivated roughly
yeyo pa danone pe genne 	his acceptance cannot be trusted 
wek lok ma yam lanebi Icaya oloko ocobbe kakare ni, 	to fulfill what was said through the prophet Isaiah:
Wek diyo cwiny ocob ticce kakare, wek wubed jo muteggi, ma roc mo pe i komwu, dok wubed ma gin mo bene pe orem botwu. 	Let perseverance finish its work so that you may be mature and complete, not lacking anything.
Ŋat ma ŋiyo cwiny dano ŋeyo tam pa Cwiny Maleŋ, pien Cwiny Maleŋ bako doge pi jo pa Lubaŋa kun lubo gin ma Lubaŋa mito. 	But if we hope for what we do not yet have, we wait for it patiently.
wangge ki peterol rac mada  	burning oneself with petrol is terrible
Luparicayo ki lupwony-cik gupenyo Yecu ni, “Piŋo lupwonnyeni pe gilubo kit kwer pa ludoŋo? Piŋo gicamo ki ciŋgi ma pe gulogo ma lubo kwer?” 	So the Pharisees and teachers of the law asked Jesus, “Why don’t your disciples live according to the tradition of the elders instead of eating their food with defiled hands?”
aweno pe weko tal wiye	the guinea fowl can not reject its bold head
dogge pek ka lok  	his mouth is heavy to speak, 
ento ŋat ma mito bedo ladit i kinwu aye myero obed laticwu, 	Instead, whoever wants to become great among you must be your servant,
ka okwoŋo kwoŋ ki nyiŋ ŋat ma bedo nakanaka, ma oketo polo ki jami ducu ma tye iye, ki lobo ki jami ducu ma tye iye, kacel ki nam ki jami ducu ma tye iye kun wacci, “Agalagala mo doŋ pe, 	And he swore by him who lives for ever and ever, who created the heavens and all that is in them, the earth and all that is in it, and the sea and all that is in it, and said, “There will be no more delay!
Gin dok gudaŋŋe tyen me aryone kun giwacci, “Aleluya! Yito me waŋo gaŋ-ŋi duny mucido cito malo lituu nakanaka.” 	And again they shouted: “Hallelujah! The smoke from her goes up for ever and ever.”
Mot ma en omiyo gin en: omiyo jo mogo me bedo lukwena, jo mukene me bedo lutit lok pa Lubaŋa, jo mukene gubed lutit lok me kwena maber, jo mukene lukwat ki lupwony.	He who descended is the very one who ascended higher than all the heavens, in order to fill the whole universe.)
codde en aye yoo acel me noggo twoo calla me AIDS 	illicit sexual intercourse is one of the ways of getting infections such as AIDS
gubeddo meegi ka lok pere-pere, pe guwinynyo gin mo, kun kono lakwoo tye ka kwallo mere tyen motokagi 	they were enganged in talking too much, and they did not hear anything, while a thief was stealing the tyre of their car
bura tye ka makko oyoo 	the cat is catching a rat 
byello latin i ngee ber pien latin dong pe parro ni etye nyo edong kene, min latin bene pe parro ni latin odong kene gwok nyo gin mo otim 	carrying the child on the back is good because the child does not feel lonely but part of the mother, likewise the mother also does not feel that the child is alone and perhaps something might hurt him 
twee me jami man pe ber 	tying of these things is not good
tye ki Iwak lok mapol ata, pe wang eye mene ma adaa 	he has numerous words, we do not know which one is right
Guwaco ni, “Man kono te lokke niŋo, ni, ‘Odoŋ kare manok’? Pe waniaŋ gin ma en tye ka waco.” 	That is why I said the Spirit will receive from me what he will make known to you.”
Jo ma gunywale guwaco lok man pien gilworo Lujudaya, pien onoŋo Lujudaya guporo lok kacel ni, ka ŋat mo otuco ni Yecu en Kricito ma Lubaŋa oyero, ci gibiryeme woko ki i kacokke. 	He is of age; he will speak for himself.”
Utmegina, lanen me ciro can ki diyo cwiny nen i kom lunebi ma yam guloko i nyiŋ Rwot. 	Brothers and sisters, as an example of patience in the face of suffering, take the prophets who spoke in the name of the Lord.
Ada awaco botwu ni, lok man ducu bipoto i kom jo ma gin yalwak me kare man. 	And so upon you will come all the righteous blood that has been shed on earth, from the blood of righteous Abel to the blood of Zechariah son of Berekiah, whom you murdered between the temple and the altar.
doggolane yege yege, mitte ni myerro gitwee patane matek 	the door is loose, its hinges need to be tightened
I legana ducu alego piwu ducu ki yomcwiny, 	I thank my God every time I remember you.
Pe wutwero mato ki kikopo pa Rwot ki pa jogi. Pe wutwero cam i meja pa Rwot ki dok i meja pa jogi. 	You cannot drink the cup of the Lord and the cup of demons too; you cannot have a part in both the Lord’s table and the table of demons.
Jo ma guwoto kweda guneno dero, ento pe guwinyo dwan ŋat ma tye ka lok kweda-ni. 	My companions saw the light, but they did not understand the voice of him who was speaking to me.
wan bene myerro wucitti 	we too must go
lyerro dano pi bal ma gutimmo marac 	to hang people for serious crime that they committed 
en onogo pe ngeyo leb lurok, macallo leb muno  	he did not know foreign language, for example, English
palle apalla ki piki pikine i kin motoka 	rides criss-cross between the cars with his motor cycle
Ci Yecu ori kec nino pyeraŋwen dyeceŋ ki dyewor, ka lacen kec ocako neke. 	After fasting forty days and forty nights, he was hungry.
otigo manok tyekko kwon yee  	a little okra can finish millet bread
ngii ki tiyo tic kama rac 	get the experience of working in a dangerous place, be friendly 
Ka Yecu onene, olwoŋe, owacce ni, “Dako, gigonyi woko i kom goroni.” 	When Jesus saw her, he called her forward and said to her, “Woman, you are set free from your infirmity.”
panggo wii latin woko ki i kom dini 	diverting the child away from religion 
Dok ni gimare ki cwiny ducu, ki ryeko ducu, ki tek ducu, ki maro lawoti macalo imarre keni, cik magi aye pigi tek makato gitum ma giwaŋo ducu ki berre ki gitum mukene ducu.” 	To love him with all your heart, with all your understanding and with all your strength, and to love your neighbor as yourself is more important than all burnt offerings and sacrifices.”
apwa miyo dano ono twatwal 	the top of the table is now full of dust and requires to be very well dusted
ucu bao ma gicwerro dong otorre dwog kany twatwal 	there is too much heaps of wood shavings here 
twoo dong obwoyo twatwal 	he is overwhelmed with disease and not well
Ento ka wubedo ka kane kekenwu ki lakwu, kun wutimo dano wadiwu calo guci, myero wugwokke wek pe wutum woko kekenwu. 	For the entire law is fulfilled in keeping this one command: “Love your neighbor as yourself.”
dano adii mamitte me purro poto man?	how many people are needed to cultivate this field?
kongo lacoi pe merro dano oyot oyot 	the lacoi beer does not make people get drunk quickly 
ree yat i wang burre 	apply medicine on the chid's sore 
Pien man aye lok ma wuwinyo nia i acakki, ni myero wamarre kekenwa. 	For this is the message you heard from the beginning: We should love one another.
Ka doŋ guo bot lwak, ci dano mo oa obino bote oguŋo i nyime kun wacci, 	Then the disciples understood that he was talking to them about John the Baptist.
Ento pe wuye an, pien an aloko lok me ada. 	Why is my language not clear to you? Because you are unable to hear what I say.
nyim ma i koloni twerro jukke ki chi 	the simsim in the papyrus mat can be taken up with hands
mon mitto keddo kom ma nyak maber 	the women want the tattoo marks or the beauty's scar marks which are prominent 
pirro nyim pong dero 	to fill filling the granary with simsim up to its brim 
Yecu dok owaco botgi ni, “Wutimo ber pi kwero cik pa Lubaŋa, wek wulub giwu kit cikwu! 	And he continued, “You have a fine way of setting aside the commands of God in order to observe your own traditions!
rutte ka donynyo i ot 	duck the head down when entering into the house
dongge maber mada i kare me ninno ducu ento ka oo i kare me pyem dongge ci komme nyogge woko 	at ordinary boxing he is very good but in the time of boxing competition, he becomes enervated
Lubaga ocweyo dano 	God created man
lok dong pol kany twatwal 	there are too many problems here 
I mwaka me apar wiye abic me loc pa Tiberio Cecar, Pilato onoŋo loyo Judaya, Kerode onoŋo loyo Galilaya, ominne Pilipo kono onoŋo loyo lobo Ituria ki Trakoniti, Lucania onoŋo loyo Abilene, 	In the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius Caesar—when Pontius Pilate was governor of Judea, Herod tetrarch of Galilee, his brother Philip tetrarch of Iturea and Traconitis, and Lysanias tetrarch of Abilene—
yel nyammo omen 	the goat ruminates
Ci gibicito woko i can ma pe tum, ento jo ma kitgi atir bicito i kwo ma pe tum.”	“Then they will go away to eternal punishment, but the righteous to eternal life.”
tii matek wek i it malo i rwom me tic meeri 	work very hard so that you may rise up in rank in your job
Lujudaya mukene gucako lubo kit pa Kepa me goba, kadi ki Barnaba bene ocako ŋak woko kun lubo kitgi ma pe nyuto cwiny me ada. 	But when they arrived, he began to draw back and separate himself from the Gentiles because he was afraid of those who belonged to the circumcision group.
Pien lobo ki jami ducu ma tye iye obedo jami pa Rwot. 	for, “The earth is the Lord’s, and everything in it.”
nywakko yoo ki ngati mo 	going together with somebody 
Ka Lubaŋa yam pe oweko jaŋ yat kikome, ci doŋ pe biweki. 	You will say then, “Branches were broken off so that I could be grafted in.”
ento latim kica pe lworo laŋolkop. 	Mercy triumphs over judgment.
Ka lwak dano ki luloc me gaŋ guwinyo lok man, ci gucako tugge. 	When they heard this, the crowd and the city officials were thrown into turmoil.
Pi meno, kadi bed atye ki tekcwiny i Kricito ma miyo aciki acika me tiyo gin mo ma mitte, 	Your love has given me great joy and encouragement, because you, brother, have refreshed the hearts of the Lord’s people.
dano mape tye ki maar nino ducu beddo kene kene 	a person who has no love always stays by herself 
langak nget yo pe weko	he who has the habbit of excreting near the path does not stop it
Mot Pricika gin ki Akwila, ki jo me ot pa Oneciporo.	And I was delivered from the lion’s mouth.
tye ka Iwoddo lokke i cwinynye	he is meditating about the matter 
meno kono dok itimmo goo? 	what have you done? 
ka cunynyo latin otte moni en do  	he is erecting his small but here
ryebbo dong agulo pii piny 	turning the waterpot upside down 
Gupo lokke, 	‘The Son of Man must be delivered over to the hands of sinners, be crucified and on the third day be raised again.’ ”
Pien wan yam pe wakelo gin mo i lobo kany, dok bene pe wabitwero tero gin mo ka waa ki i lobo. 	But godliness with contentment is great gain.
gin wotto alwak alwak 	they walk in groups
“Dano ducu ma oryemo dakone, ka dok onyomo mukene otimo abor, ki ŋat ma onyomo dako ma cware oryemo bene otimo abor. 	It is easier for heaven and earth to disappear than for the least stroke of a pen to drop out of the Law.
latinne kitte ber mada pien ocwallo waraga me pwoc pi jami ducu ma gitimmo maber pirre 	the child is very good, because he sent them a letter of thankfulness for all the good things that were doing for him
tyerro ringo ki rwot 	to present meat to the chief
jollo ic ki cam 	eating at least some food to keep one going
I kare-nu onoŋo dano mo ma nyiŋe Yucepu tye kunnu ma oa ki i gaŋ mo pa Lujudaya ma gilwoŋo Arimataya. En onoŋo ŋat acel i kin jo ma bedo i Lukiko, en dano maber, dok kite atir, 	Now there was a man named Joseph, a member of the Council, a good and upright man,
torro nyim i dero 	collecting sesame and putting it in the barn
yib lagwee twerro gun ci potto tegge entolacen doki donno woko 	snakes like eating lizards very much
Ento en onoŋo loko pi kome ma ot pa Lubaŋani. 	They replied, “It has taken forty-six years to build this temple, and you are going to raise it in three days?”
ka cen doŋ oa ki i kom dano ma onoŋo tye ki cen, ma te lebe oto, oloko, ci lwak guuro. 	When the demon left, the man who had been mute spoke, and the crowd was amazed.
nen mon madoŋo macalo mego, ki mon matino myero inengi macalo lumegini, laboŋo tam mo marac. 	Treat younger men as brothers,
Lok man ma en otiyo-ni oywek i lobo Judaya ducu ki i lobo ducu ma orumo. 	This news about Jesus spread throughout Judea and the surrounding country.
Pien onoŋo ocaŋo jo mapol, ma omiyo jo ducu ma komgi lit gidine i kome ka boŋe. 	For he had healed many, so that those with diseases were pushing forward to touch him.
En doŋ tye malo, loyo kit loc ducu ki twero ki teko ki dito ducu ma tye i polo, ki nyiŋ mo ma oywek i lobo me kare man ki i lobo me kare ma bibino-ni bene. 	he exerted when he raised Christ from the dead and seated him at his right hand in the heavenly realms,
Guwaco ni, “Man pe Yecu, wod pa Yucepu, ma wonne ki minne waŋeyo? Piŋo en dok waco ni, ‘An alor piny nia i polo’?” 	At this the Jews there began to grumble about him because he said, “I am the bread that came down from heaven.”
yub kitti ka imitti dano gubed kweddi maber 	change your manners if you want people to stay well with you
Ii pe obedo yom pi gitum awaŋa ki gitum ma gityero pi bal. 	with burnt offerings and sin offerings you were not pleased.
bongo tye ka twoo 	the clothes are drying 
Yam onoŋo ginyuto botgi ni, kwena ma gimiyogi pe otiko gin kikomgi, ento otiko wun. En aye lok ma kombeddi doŋ jo ma gitito lok me kwena maber gutyeko tito botwu pi Cwiny Maleŋ ma gicwalo ma oa ki i polo	trying to find out the time and circumstances to which the Spirit of Christ in them was pointing when he predicted the sufferings of the Messiah and the glories that would follow.
Konyo gin aŋo, utmegina, ka ŋat mo waco ni etye ki niye kun pe keto i tic? Ci niye meno twero lare? 	What good is it, my brothers and sisters, if someone claims to have faith but has no deeds? Can such faith save them?
dako ma lacaarro pe bedo gang, beddo ka wot atata 	a loose woman does not stay at home, always roaming about 
jwat gwinynye 	strike his butticks 
Ka acito, ayubo ki wun kabedo, dok abidwogo ka omowu bota, wek ka ma an abedo iye, wun bene wubed iye. 	You believe in God; believe also in me.
Ka guwinyo lok man, ci guliŋ litik, ka gucako pako kun giwaco ni, “Lurok bene Lubaŋa doŋ omiyogi ŋut me donyo i kwo.” 	When they heard this, they had no further objections and praised God, saying, “So then, even to Gentiles God has granted repentance that leads to life.”
pit ikare man tek mada pien wel jami ducu dong tye malo twatwal 	pit in these days is very difficult because the costs of things have gone up very high
akuri ma welo piyo ki moko 	a visitor dove is easily caught
gam mot men ene 	accept or receive your gift here
par pi gin angoo ma myerro ibitii en aye konynyo 	meditation on what things you will do is useful
mac onywalo buru	fire has begotten ashes
cib wii meja 	put it on top of the table 
tic matek labongo cam ma rommo, kello jonynyo ki dano	hard work without enough food, makes people lose weight 
Wanenu Yecu ma en aye latel wiwa i lok kom niye, en ŋat ma ocobo niyewa kakare. Pi yomcwiny ma giketo i nyime en yam ociro yatariya, kun ocayo lewic ma giketo i kome	fixing our eyes on Jesus, the pioneer and perfecter of faith
tye ka petto piny pudi 	he is still roaming about 
wek wuŋe mar pa Kricito ma kato ŋec ducu, wek wupoŋ ki gin mo ducu ma opoŋ i i Lubaŋa. 	may have power, together with all the Lord’s holy people, to grasp how wide and long and high and deep is the love of Christ,
Ka owaco lok meno, Lujudaya guket woko kun gitye ka pyem matek i kingi kekengi.] 	After he said this, the Jews left, arguing vigorously among themselves.
Tin i gaŋ pa Daudi ginywalo piwu lalar, en Kricito Rwot. 	Today in the town of David a Savior has been born to you; he is the Messiah, the Lord.
Adada, awacciwu ni, tye jo mogo ma gucuŋ kany ma pe gibibilo to wacel, ma peya guneno Wod pa dano ka bino i kerre.”	“Truly I tell you, some who are standing here will not taste death before they see the Son of Man coming in his kingdom.”
lunyodo mogo pe gicullo lim me kwan oyot oyot 	some of the parents do not pay the fees quickly an otole dance
Ka guo i Kapernaum, jo ma jogo mucoro me ot pa Lubaŋa gucito bot Petero ci guwacce ni, “Lapwonywu pe culo mucoro me ot pa Lubaŋa?” 	They will kill him, and on the third day he will be raised to life.” And the disciples were filled with grief.
go olang me coyo litino wek gucit kakwan 	ring the bell to wake up the children to go to school
pi timo kica bot kwariwa kun opo pi gicikkene maleŋ 	to show mercy to our ancestors and to remember his holy covenant,
Odiko con ma piny pud col, Yecu oa malo, ci opuk ocito woko wa i kabedo ma dano pe iye, ci obedo ka lego Lubaŋa kunnu. 	Very early in the morning, while it was still dark, Jesus got up, left the house and went off to a solitary place, where he prayed.
Lumony gutero Paulo kit ma gicikogi kwede. Gukwanye dyewor gutere wa i Antipatric. 	So the soldiers, carrying out their orders, took Paul with them during the night and brought him as far as Antipatris.
wan wacwallo lagam me waragawu laworo 	we sent a letter in reply to yours yesterday
Kare okato manok, ŋat mukene onene, owacci, “In bene i ŋat acel i kingi.” Ento Petero owaco ni, “Nye, an ko!” 	A little later someone else saw him and said, “You also are one of them.” “Man, I am not!” Peter replied.
dano adii ma tin gubino ka tic arododo 	how many people came to work for the chief? 
Dok bene pe gitwero nyuto ni lok ma gikelo i koma kombeddi tye kakare. 	And they cannot prove to you the charges they are now making against me.
pi ye Yecu omiyo laco man olimo yotkom i nyimwu ducu. 	It is Jesus’ name and the faith that comes through him that has completely healed him, as you can all see.
Iweny atata ceng mo biterri i too	frequent fighting will one day bring you to death
oboo yenynyo 	the lungs distends
i boma nino ducu tye jammi mapol me anenna 	there are always many things in the town to be seen
Jon yam ruko boŋo yer kinaga, ka tweyo pyere ki del, kun camo bonyo ki moo kic ma i tim. 	John wore clothing made of camel’s hair, with a leather belt around his waist, and he ate locusts and wild honey.
litino gicello winyo ki atero 	the children shoot the birds with arrows
Lukwena guwaco bot Rwot ni, “Med niyewa!” 	The apostles said to the Lord, “Increase our faith!”
nyako ma pyerre tye ka wide woko 	a girl whose waist is narrowing or getting very small 
pakko jamine	to adore his properties, children
Ka Yucepu ocwalo dano ka lwoŋo wonne ki wadigi ducu, ma gin jo pyerabiro wiye abic, 	After this, Joseph sent for his father Jacob and his whole family, seventy-five in all.
unno dano pe gin maber  	over-using a person is not a good thing
mony cok ka potto i kin lobo caa 	the war is nearly breaking out between those countries 
Pi meno, ka ikelo motti bot Lubaŋa, ma itye ka tyerone i kom keno tyer, ka ce ipo ni omeru onoŋo tye ki lok mo i komi, 	“Therefore, if you are offering your gift at the altar and there remember that your brother or sister has something against you,
Yecu dok owacci, “Doŋ abiporo jo me kare man ki gin aŋo? Gin calo aŋo? 	Jesus went on to say, “To what, then, can I compare the people of this generation? What are they like?
kidi man twerro gille 	the stone can be rolled away 
wii ot twerro tadde ki yadi ma odonggi 	the remaining poles are enough for the construction of the root of the hut
teer yugi man ducu ici ony wii odur 	take all this rubbish and pour it on the rubbish heap 
Pi meno, pe wubed miŋ, ento wutem niaŋ gin ma Rwot mito wuti. 	making the most of every opportunity, because the days are evil.
Ka dok awinyo bene wel dano ma giketo lanyut i komgi, gubedo dano alip miya acel ki pyeraŋwen wiye aŋwen, ma gua ki i kaka pa jo Icrael ducu. 	Then I heard the number of those who were sealed: 144,000 from all the tribes of Israel.
ka pe ingeyo pim maber ci pe itwerro cello bap 	if you do not know how to aim well, you cannot shoot the target
gin magi ducu gin aye acakki me te can ma bipoto i lobo. 	All these are the beginning of birth pains.
gubedo ka tuco lok me kwena maber kunnu. 	where they continued to preach the gospel.
en ronynyo nyako moni  	he sleeps with a certain girl
Yecu oceer i nino me adek	he is contesting the ownership of the cloth that belongs to his friend that it is his
Kapten ocwalo awobi-nu kun cike ni, “Pe dok itit bot ŋat mo ni itito lok man bota.” 	The commander dismissed the young man with this warning: “Don’t tell anyone that you have reported this to me.”
Ento ka ŋatti mo woto dyewor, yokke, pien ceŋ pe i iye.” 	Jesus answered, “Are there not twelve hours of daylight? Anyone who walks in the daytime will not stumble, for they see by this world’s light.
lok ma lumalaika bene guparo me nenone matek twatwal. 	It was revealed to them that they were not serving themselves but you, when they spoke of the things that have now been told you by those who have preached the gospel to you by the Holy Spirit sent from heaven
Ento atito botwu ni, tye jo mogo ma gucuŋ kany ma pe gibibilo to, ma pud peya guneno ker pa Lubaŋa.” 	“Truly I tell you, some who are standing here will not taste death before they see the kingdom of God.”
bal wakke ne woko 	spoil his pride
obwoye i tuko me rette 	he defeated him in wrestling
Won ot owaco botgi ni, Wun bene wucit i poto olokka, dok abimiyowu gin ma atir. Ci gucito. 	He told them, ‘You also go and work in my vineyard, and I will pay you whatever is right.’
Gin ma rom ki man ma koni larowu en aye batija	After being made alive, he went and made proclamation to the imprisoned spirits—
latinne kitte rac tye ka juurro lac i bar kama leng 	the child has bad manners, he is passing urine in the field openly
An ka gitiŋa malo nia i lobo, ci abipeyo dano ducu bota.” 	Jesus said, “This voice was for your benefit, not mine.
rony pe ber	to make fun is not good 
Ka jo ma i ŋete guneno gin ma mito timme, ci gupenyo ni, “Rwot, watoŋ dano ki pala lucwan?” 	When Jesus’ followers saw what was going to happen, they said, “Lord, should we strike with our swords?”
Onoŋo tye kunnu dano mo ma nyiŋe Jakayo, lajogmucoro madit, dok lalonyo bene. 	A man was there by the name of Zacchaeus; he was a chief tax collector and was wealthy.
ryeb dong agulo pii piny 	turn the water pot upside down
potto pa iye oa pi twoo 	her abortion came as a result of illness
wan dong wakatti en 	we have now come 
cukari otum woko ni pill, man tin dong wamatto cal nono labongo cukari 	the sugar is completely finished and today we shall take tea without sugar
I kare mukato yam Lubaŋa pe onyuto muŋ man bot dano adana-ni, ento kombeddi doŋ onyuto bot lukwenane maleŋ ki lutit lokke, pi Cwiny Maleŋ. 	In reading this, then, you will be able to understand my insight into the mystery of Christ,
Pien ka ma nyeko ki laro dito tye iye, inoŋo anyobanyoba ki tim ducu maraco tye iye. 	For where you have envy and selfish ambition, there you find disorder and every evil practice.
Doŋ dano ma waco ni eŋeye, ma pe omako cikke, noŋo lagoba, ada pe i iye. 	Whoever says, “I know him,” but does not do what he commands is a liar, and the truth is not in that person.
Iwar bene nyutto ryeko 	grey hair also shows wisdom
awobini ki nyakoni laworro gubeddo ka gaane i kanica 	the boy and the girl were looking at each other lovingly through the angle of their eyes
latin put nino ducu beddo ma onweng pien cam nonggo pe rommo 	a malnourished child is always emaciated 
daba ma i wang pii twerro wadde woko 	the mud in the well can be removed
Petero ogamo kun wacci, “Nen, wan waweko jamiwa ducu ci walubi. Wabinoŋo iye gin aŋo?” 	Peter answered him, “We have left everything to follow you! What then will there be for us?”
got cigwu ka dong wumyel kwedde 	hook your hands together and then dance
akuku ryeny ni miri-miri  	mica or iron ore, when polished, shines very brightly
gitye pud ka nyammo lokke	they are still discussing the case
opotto ni pac 	it fell heavily with a sound on the ground 
Doŋ aciko jo ducu ma guwinyo lok ma gitito i buk man, ni, ka ce dano mo dok omedo lok mo iye, Lubaŋa bene bimedo gemo ma gitito pire i buk kany-nyi i kome. 	I warn everyone who hears the words of the prophecy of this scroll: If anyone adds anything to them, God will add to that person the plagues described in this scroll.
gudo ma citto Lira tye kwene? 	where is the road going to Lira?
wek ekel lwak muye en i nyime kene macalo nyako mamwonya twatwal, kun pe tye ka mo ma ojuŋŋe i kome, nyo kadi ki poyo mo bene pe, wek obed leŋ laboŋo ka mo murocce. 	to make her holy, cleansing her by the washing with water through the word,
mukko yat 	uprooting the tree 
Eee pe kit meno 	no nono not that way 
lanen lye kwene ma nyutto ni jami magi gitiyogi ki i Buggereja? 	where are the distinguished marks, which show that they are made in England? 
agulune twerro rodde i wii lawotte 	the pots can be piled one on top of another 
nyekko pe gin maber 	jealousy is not a good thing 
danone kite obeddo okani 	the person has a peculiar manner or he is queer 
“Dok i paconi, icitit gin madit ma Lubaŋa otimo i komi.” Ocito otito i kin gaŋa meno ducu lok madit ma Yecu otimo i kome. 	“Return home and tell how much God has done for you.” So the man went away and told all over town how much Jesus had done for him.
Dano ma paro pi nino mo, paro pi Rwot, ki ŋat ma camo bene camo pi Rwot, pien pwoyo Lubaŋa	One person’s faith allows them to eat anything, but another, whose faith is weak, eats only vegetables.
Wan dok wacako pakke kenwa? Nyo wamito waraga me pakowa botwu, macalo jo mogo gitye kwede, nyo waraga ma wun kikomwu aye wucoyo? 	I am glad I can have complete confidence in you.
gaddo cam twatwal teerri ibur oyot oyot 	eating excessively takes you very quickly into the grave
litinoni pe gitye ka nenowa nen ni wanggi callo tye ka caarre ki mac matar ma maloni 	the children seem not to see us, it looks as if their eyes are being dazzled by the bright light up here
Cen gubako doggi bote ni pe ocikgi ni gicit i Bur. 	And they begged Jesus repeatedly not to order them to go into the Abyss.
Yecu man gimiye botwu macalo Lubaŋa yam onoŋo oyubo kun oŋeyo gin ma bitimme i anyim, ci wun wugure i kom yatariya, wuneke ki ciŋ jo ma pe guye Lubaŋa. 	This man was handed over to you by God’s deliberate plan and foreknowledge; and you, with the help of wicked men, put him to death by nailing him to the cross.
Ka doŋ guri pi kare malac ma pe gicamo cam mo, Paulo obino ocuŋ i dyegi ci owacci, “Luditona, kono yam wuwinyo doga ma pe wua ki I Kurete, kono pe wapoto i can man ki lannye pa jami. 	After they had gone a long time without food, Paul stood up before them and said: “Men, you should have taken my advice not to sail from Crete; then you would have spared yourselves this damage and loss.
jalle lagwer lok mada myerro pe wuye gin ducu ma en otitto 	the fellow is well known for his incorrect reporting of words which he has heard therefore do not accept his words
Kadi bed onoŋo tye jo mogo ma gikelogi i kinwa ma pe gin utmego kikome, magi gin jo ma gubino ka roto kit kuc ma watye kwede i Kricito Yecu, ka wek gilokwa wadok opii. 	Yet not even Titus, who was with me, was compelled to be circumcised, even though he was a Greek.
orudi gimaarro wotto abicel abicel i dul acel 	the wolves always go about in a group of six
I kare meno Petero obedo ka wirre i kingi ducu, ci ocito piny bot jo pa Lubaŋa ma gibedo i Lida. 	As Peter traveled about the country, he went to visit the Lord’s people who lived in Lydda.
nenno latinnne ka gwinno ringo rac mada 	it is shameful to see the child eat the meat bit by bit
Ka en owinyo pi Yecu, ci ooro ludoŋo pa Lujudaya bote kun lege ni obin ocaŋ laticce. 	The centurion heard of Jesus and sent some elders of the Jews to him, asking him to come and heal his servant.
Lwak madwoŋ olube, pien ceŋ guneno lanyut ma en otiyo i kom lutwo. 	Some time after this, Jesus crossed to the far shore of the Sea of Galilee (that is, the Sea of Tiberias),
litino gimaarro gwenynye mada 	the children love very much to pinch one another
Kit meno bene i kare pa Lot, 	“It was the same in the days of Lot
piny pud dyak  	the ground is still wet
gimakkongi pi lim abumma	they were arrested for swindled money
Dok obolo botgi carolok mukene, kun wacci, “Ker me polo rom ki kodi dek karadali, ma dano okwanyo ci ocoyo i potone. 	He told them another parable: “The kingdom of heaven is like a mustard seed, which a man took and planted in his field.
Oparo pi neno Yecu, ento pe otwero pi lwak, pien en cek. 	He wanted to see who Jesus was, but because he was short he could not see over the crowd.
Nia wa i kare ca en tye ka kuro nio ka gimiyo lukworre doko kom laten tyene, 	and since that time he waits for his enemies to be made his footstool.
pimmo waar ma rommo tyen	measuring the boundaries of their land
bak donggi wek gitimmi kica 	apologise and plead so that you may be forgiven
en gwenynyo komme mada pien tye ki gwinyo 	he scratches his body very much because he has scabies
Paulo ogwaro rido yen, obolo i mac, ci twol lacocodo omwomme woko pi lyeto ka orine i ciŋe. 	Paul gathered a pile of brushwood and, as he put it on the fire, a viper, driven out by the heat, fastened itself on his hand.
lacoo monni okatto kany ki luduku 	a certain person with a gun
Lacen owaco ki lupwonnyene ni, “Kac dwoŋ, ento lutic nok. 	When he saw the crowds, he had compassion on them, because they were harassed and helpless, like sheep without a shepherd.
Alegowu ni ka abino botwu, pe wumiya abed ki kit gero ki tekcwiny ma ageno ni atwero bedo kwede i kom jo mogo ma gitamo ni wan walubo kit me lobo man. 	By the humility and gentleness of Christ, I appeal to you—I, Paul, who am “timid” when face to face with you, but “bold” toward you when away!
bollo cam ki gwok  	throwing food to a dog
Ka gitedo mugati, tobi matidi mo keken aye yenyo moko woko ducu. 	That kind of persuasion does not come from the one who calls you.
moo wicce twerro tinne pi dwe acel 	the hair oil can be used sparingly for one month
Dano ducu ma yam guwinye guuro niaŋŋe, ki kit ma en dok kwede i peny. 	Everyone who heard him was amazed at his understanding and his answers.
pien ludikon ma gitiyo tic mabeco ginoŋ rwom maber pigi kengi, dok gidoko jo ma cwinygi tek i kom niye ma tye i Kricito Yecu. 	A deacon must be faithful to his wife and must manage his children and his household well.
man latin okuro pa agaa ma ber twatwalli? 	whose puppy is this that is very nice indeed?
Waraga man oa ki bot Paulo ma lamabuc pi Kricito Yecu, ki bot ominwa Temceo. Bot Pilemon latic wadiwa ma wamaro 	From now on, let no one cause me trouble, for I bear on my body the marks of Jesus.
Dano magi apar wiye aryo Yecu oorogi, kun cikogi ni, “Pe wucit i kin Lulork, pe bene wudony i gaŋ pa Lucamaria mo, 	These twelve Jesus sent out with the following instructions: “Do not go among the Gentiles or enter any town of the Samaritans.
pe lye ngatimo i wii lobo kany mape oballo bal 	there is nobody here in this world who has not committed sin
Kit macalo tim maraco bibedo ka medde ameda-ni, mar pa jo mapol bikwe woko. 	Because of the increase of wickedness, the love of most will grow cold,
wang coo me poto tye piny kwica 	the field's boundary is down there 
dano ma laolle 	a troublesome person 
kic twerro nyubbe ki gwen aregga 	honey can be mixed with ground white ants
Ci cutcut dobo ocaŋ ki i kome, kome odoko leŋ. 	Immediately the leprosy left him and he was cleansed.
awobe myerro pe wulokko lok ma gunynyo i luditto	boys you should not speak things which anger to elders
Yecu oito malo i wi got, obedo piny kunnu kacel ki lupwonnyene. 	and a great crowd of people followed him because they saw the signs he had performed by healing the sick.
ento en bicer woko i ŋe nino adek.” 	Three days later he will rise.”
wangge pek  	his face is heavy and fag, he looks fierce, or has forbkiding look, charismatic look
Ento jo Icrael ma yam guyelle pi cobo cik ni wek gibed jo ma kitgi atir, cobo cik oloyogi. 	What then shall we say? That the Gentiles, who did not pursue righteousness, have obtained it, a righteousness that is by faith;
atye ka catto pul keken 	he thinks that he is the only one who is a clever person, because he despises other people very much 
Wugwokke kun wuneno maber ni ŋat mo pe opoto ka gamo kica pa Lubaŋa. Wunen ni ŋat mo pe obedo macalo lwit yat makec ma ka otwi ci kelo ayela, dok balo jo mapol. 	See to it that no one falls short of the grace of God and that no bitter root grows up to cause trouble and defile many.
wic ma otal nyo tal wic 	bald headed 
Catan ocako bite, ma onoŋo en tye kacel ki lee tim, kun lumalaika gikonye. 	He was with the wild animals, and angels attended him.
puny latin man okak mada 	the child's heel is very much cracked
Ka lunyodone doŋ gutyeko cobo lok ducu ma tye i cik pa Rwot, ci gudok i Galilaya, i gaŋgi Najaret. 	When Joseph and Mary had done everything required by the Law of the Lord, they returned to Galilee to their own town of Nazareth.
“Dok ker me polo rom ki lacat-wil ma onoŋo yam obedo ka yenyo tiko mabeco me wel. 	“Again, the kingdom of heaven is like a merchant looking for fine pearls.
Lok man lok ada: ka ce dano mo mito tic me bedo latel jo pa Lubaŋa, noŋo en mito tic maber. 	Among them are Hymenaeus and Alexander, whom I have handed over to Satan to be taught not to blaspheme.
Jo mogo i kinwu gitye ka tamo ni an pe abibino botwu, omiyo gitye ka wakke. 	Some of you have become arrogant, as if I were not coming to you.
Ka Yecu oo i kabedo-nu, oneno malo, owacce ni, “Jakayo, lor piny oyotoyot	When Jesus reached the spot, he looked up and said to him, “Zacchaeus, come down immediately
ki Anderiya ki Pilipo ki Bartolomayo ki Matayo, ki Tomaci, ki Yakobo wod Alipayo, ki Tadayo, ki Cimon ma obedo i kin jo ma gimito locken, 	Andrew, Philip, Bartholomew, Matthew, Thomas, James son of Alphaeus, Thaddaeus, Simon the Zealot
gulwenynyo pi jer ni en opii mamwa 	they fought because he humiliated him by telling him that he was only a slave 
Bito dano macalo man pe oa ki bot ŋat ma ceŋ olwoŋowuni. 	Who cut in on you to keep you from obeying the truth?
wek anen 	let me 
Lujog-mucoro ki lubalo onoŋo yam ginyiko cok ka winyo lok pa Yecu. 	Now the tax collectors and sinners were all gathering around to hear Jesus.
dano ka poo twatwal i kom mwoc mo manok, nonggo tye ki maleriya 	if a man startles quite often due to small noises, usually he has malaria
Pe tye ŋatti mo ma mayo ki bota	The reason my Father loves me is that I lay down my life—only to take it up again.
yubbe oyot oyot wek wacitti 	prepare yourself quickly so that we may go
pe twerro nino ka pe kong mow yuc mo me taa 	he cannot sleep until he has inhaled or puffed at tobacco
bitto anyogi ma otwoo 	shelling the dried maize from their cobs
Kit meno lok pa Rwot odoŋo omedde ki twero madwoŋ. 	In this way the word of the Lord spread widely and grew in power.
Ento kit macalo tye, Kricito doŋ onoŋo tic maber atika makato megi-ni woko, rom ki kit gicikke ma en oyubo ma obedo ber matek makato mukene macon ca, pien Lubaŋa omoko kun onoŋo ociko pi miyo jami mabeco makato. 	But in fact the ministry Jesus has received is as superior to theirs as the covenant of which he is mediator is superior to the old one, since the new covenant is established on better promises.
nyonyo tek 	the metal is hard
tammo me dok gang diki 	thinking of going home tomorrow 
kun wuŋeyo ni, gin mo ducu ma dano mo otiyo maber, Rwot bicule pire ma rom aroma ki ticce ma en otiyo, kadi en latic nyo dano ma lone kene. 	Serve wholeheartedly, as if you were serving the Lord, not people,
wek latin olyak tyenne ki bacilin	let the child smear vaseline on her legs
Okonyo laticce Icrael, opo pi timo kica, 	He has helped his servant Israel, remembering to be merciful
gikello cementi dong tyen apar 	cement has been brought ten times
En yam oneno gin ma bitimme i anyim ka oloko bene i kom cer pa Kricito ma Lubaŋa oyero ni, pe gitenye ata i lobo pa jo muto, kome bene pe otop. 	Seeing what was to come, he spoke of the resurrection of the Messiah, that he was not abandoned to the realm of the dead, nor did his body see decay.
litino alimma ka gigwokkongi maber ci gibeddo maber mada	if the slaves are well treated, they live very well, 
Pe wuwek ŋat mo obwolwu i yo ducu, pien nino meno pud pe bibino, nio waŋ ma jemo i kom Lubaŋa koŋ obedo tye, dok bene nio waŋ ma dano ma turo cik koŋ onen, dano ma myero orweny woko matwal. 	Don’t let anyone deceive you in any way, for that day will not come until the rebellion occurs and the man of lawlessness is revealed, the man doomed to destruction.
Kerode owaco ni, “Jo yam atoŋo wiye woko do	But Herod said, “I beheaded John
Yam tye lanebi mo ma dako, nyiŋe Anna, nya pa Panuel, pa jo Acer. 	There was also a prophet, Anna, the daughter of Penuel, of the tribe of Asher
Doŋ Abraim pi diyo cwinye omiyo en onoŋo gin ma yam Lubaŋa ociko pire. 	And so after waiting patiently, Abraham received what was promised.
Wun jo ma yam doŋ gimiyo wuŋeyo lok man con, koŋ amito dok apo wiwu ni, Rwot ma yam olaro jo Icrael ki i lobo Ejipt, lacenne en dok otyeko jo ma pe guye en woko. 	Dear friends, although I was very eager to write to you about the salvation we share, I felt compelled to write and urge you to contend for the faith that was once for all entrusted to God’s holy people.
en gammo ni ngoo i kom lok ma gicoone? 	what was his reply to what was written to him? 
beddo i cula pe gin ma dano mitto, binno pi can 	living alone is not wanted by anybody but comes as a result of poverty
onoŋo doŋ ogome woko, ma pe twero tirre. 	She was bent over and could not straighten up at all.
orro dano ka kwallo kwoo pe ber	to send people to steal is not good
obedo kunnu ki lupwonnyene. 	Therefore Jesus no longer moved about publicly among the people of Judea
ocubbo opacco apacca  	he speared it superficially
gen i Yecu en aye yoo ma atir me kwoo 	trust in Jesus to lead you in the right way to life 
poto man twerro purre maber mada 	this field can be well cultivated 
nwoo lokke dok odocco 	renew the matter again
Pien lee ma yam ajwaka madit tero remogi i kabedo maleŋ me bedo gitum pi bal, komgi yam giwaŋo woko cen i ŋe gony. 	The high priest carries the blood of animals into the Most Holy Place as a sin offering, but the bodies are burned outside the camp.
wamitto wanger ot ma dong bibeddo naka naka mape mitto yubbe 	we want to build a house that will be there forever without requiring renovation
Yecu dok onwoyo keto ciŋe i waŋ lawaŋe-oto	Once more Jesus put his hands on the man’s eyes
Pien nen, ka awinyo dwan me motti, latin ma i iya otiŋŋe ki yomcwiny. 	As soon as the sound of your greeting reached my ears, the baby in my womb leaped for joy.
jape tye ki lim madowong mada, pe inenno kit motoka ma owillo ki jami ma tye i odde 	the fellow has plenty of money as you see the type of car which he has bought and the things that he has in his house
orukko nyor jabu i gutte 	she wore a gold chain around her neck 
tic me pac tek, pe tic ma yot 	carpentry is very difficult, not easy work
Kadi bed waneno can, dok bene gitimo tim me lewic i komwa i Pilipi macalo wun wuŋeyo, kadi pyem obedo dwoŋ, Lubaŋawa omiyo botwa tekcwiny me tito botwu lok me kwena maber ka maleŋ. 	We had previously suffered and been treated outrageously in Philippi, as you know, but with the help of our God we dared to tell you his gospel in the face of strong opposition.
Pire omiyo yam adoko latic ma konyo lwak man, pi tic ma Lubaŋa omiya piwu, wek ami lok pa Lubaŋa o?ene. 	Now I rejoice in what I am suffering for you, and I fill up in my flesh what is still lacking in regard to Christ’s afflictions, for the sake of his body, which is the church.
Doŋ pi lok ma dok i kom lok me kwena maber, gin gudoko lukwor pa Lubaŋa piwu, ento pi lok ma kemo yer, Lubaŋa marogi pi kwarogi. 	And this is my covenant with them when I take away their sins.”
gweno pappe ka too 	a chicken flaps its wings when dying 
rany lok kany ci wangoyi cut 	speak scornfully here then we will beat you straightaway 
bil pe gin ma yot 	hypnotism is not an easy thing
Ento lwak guwo ki daŋŋe kun gidiye ni myero gigure i kom yatariya. Dwangi oloyo. 	But with loud shouts they insistently demanded that he be crucified, and their shouts prevailed.
Latic meno tye ki gum, ma laditte ka odwogo binoŋe kun tye ka tiyo ticce meno. 	It will be good for that servant whom the master finds doing so when he returns.
Olanya lagoba mada pe wuwiny lokke 	he is a fretful child who wants to be with his mother only
latinni dok lacerre twatwal pe mitto winynyo lok mo me pwony 	this child is very stubborn, he does not want to listen to any talk or advice
wii deroni twerro ille 	the cover of this barn can be lifted
coo mitto anyira ma bocco ma igi onat	the men like tall girls with flat abdomen
Kricito obedo cal pa Lubaŋa ma pe nen-ni, latin kayo me ginaketa ducu ma Lubaŋa oketo, 	in whom we have redemption, the forgiveness of sins.
I nino mukwoŋo me cabit, mon gupuk kwarpiny, gubino i wi lyel, kun gikelo aŋwecegi ma guyubo. 	so that the servant of God may be thoroughly equipped for every good work.
canne ogegge nyommo dako 	his poverty prevented him from marrying a wife canne omiyo pe okwanno, his poverty prevented him from studying
aa male ilok ki dano	get up and speak to the people
en tika bicitto 	will he really go?
ceng ma wabicitto kwedde Kampala pud peya wanngeyo 	we do not yet know the time when we shall be going to Kampala
Jo ducu ma gubedo opii, myero guti ki luditogi macalo jo ma romo awora i yo ducu, wek ŋat mo pe oyet nyiŋ Lubaŋa nyo pwonywa. 	Beyond all question, the mystery from which true godliness springs is great: He appeared in the flesh, was vindicated by the Spirit, was seen by angels, was preached among the nations, was believed on in the world, was taken up in glory.
lapwonynye myerro oket cwinynye me winyno lok pa lapwony maber 	a student must listen carefully to his teacher's words
En obedo ka lubo korwa, kun daŋŋe ni, “Jo man gin aye lutic pa Lubaŋa Mamalo Twal ma gituco botwu yo me larre.” 	She followed Paul and the rest of us, shouting, “These men are servants of the Most High God, who are telling you the way to be saved.”
Lujudaya pe guye ni en yam obedo lawaŋoto, dok ni giyabo waŋe, nio ka gilwoŋo jo ma gunywalo dano ma giyabo waŋe-ni. 	Then they turned again to the blind man, “What have you to say about him? It was your eyes he opened.” The man replied, “He is a prophet.”
Ento Petero owacce ni, “Gony te lok me carolok man botwa.” 	If the blind lead the blind, both will fall into a pit.”
ento ka gubino ci Kepa ojer onyiko woko cen, opokke woko ki botgi pi lworo dul pa jo ma mito ni jo muye Kricito myero koŋ gilirgi. 	For before certain men came from James, he used to eat with the Gentiles
lamonne pa dano ducu ma i wii lobo man en aye catan 	the enemy of all the people on earth is satan
Yecu ogamo ni, “Wugokke, ŋatti mo owek rwenyowu	He replied: “Watch out that you are not deceived
Dok gutemo make, ento en opucce woko ki i ciŋgi. 	what about the one whom the Father set apart as his very own and sent into the world? Why then do you accuse me of blasphemy because I said, ‘I am God’s Son’?
gin me ywec pe tye 	a thing for sweeping is not there
lokke tonno cwinynye mada 	the matter grieves him very much 
piir lok i kom ngati mo 	planning against somebody 
gol tyenne woko 	amputate his leg off 
Ka dano mo pe bedo i an, ci gibole woko macalo jaŋ yat, two woko. Gicokogi, gibologi i mac, giwaŋ woko. 	You are already clean because of the word I have spoken to you.
pien Catan obedo ka timo bal nia i acakki piny. Gin mumiyo Wod pa Lubaŋa yam onen, en aye pi turo tic pa Catan woko. 	The reason the Son of God appeared was to destroy the devil’s work.
ladwar twerro beddo wa i dye wor ka pud peya onougo lee ma en mitto 	a hunter can stay up to night if he has not yet found the animal he likes 
Pilato otero Yecu, ogoye ki anino. 	Then Jesus answered, “Will you really lay down your life for me? Very truly I tell you, before the rooster crows, you will disown me three times!
tye twon logo mo kany ka motoka opotto iye ci pe kwanynye 	there is a great depression here into which if a car was to fall there it will not be removed 
Meno bimiyo yo yabbe botwu malac me donyo i ker ma ri nakanaka pa Rwotwa ma en Lalarwa Yecu Kricito. 	and you will receive a rich welcome into the eternal kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
pokko dyel macol kom matar 	separating black goats from the white ones
pi meno abigoye, ci abigonye.” 	Therefore I will have him punished and then release him.”
cok jami ma gicammo kwede ducu i teer i jokon 	take all the things used for eating into the kitchen
yoggo doggola 	loosening the door
nwoyo reggo nyim 	grinding the simsim paste over again
en obitta ni wacit kwedde ka kwang i ka kwang pa cukul, ka cunno anyira cukul 	he enticed me to go with him to swim in the schools' swimmimg pool to court the school girls 
awobe mabecco twerro yerre ki i kin gang me pwonynye me tic man 	very fine boys can be selected from the villages to be taught to do this work
ocitto tunggi 	he went to their home 
tukko me pyem madit me mupira bibeddo i Decemba	the main football championship competition will take place in December 
dako ma lacoco pe myerro beddo i gang pien ballo mon mukene woko 	a woman who is a prostitute should not be in the home because she will spoil the other women 
lupwony gitye kwene ma litino gitye ka lak alakka i dyekal 	where are the teachers now that the children are roaming about in the compound?
ento ye lokwu ducu myero obed ni, “Iyo,” nyo ni, “Pe,” wek pe giŋol kop i komwu. 	All you need to say is a simple “Yes” or “No.” Otherwise you will be condemned.
Ci gidaŋŋe ki dwan maloŋo ni, “Laro dano tye bot Lubaŋawa ma obedo i wi komker, ki bot Latin romo!” 	And they cried out in a loud voice: “Salvation belongs to our God, who sits on the throne, and to the Lamb.”
lyer bogni i kom tol 	hang the clothes on the line 
Rwot kikome bilor piny kun a ki i polo ki lwoŋo me twer, ma dwan lamalaika maditte biwinnye, tum pa Lubaŋa bikok. Jo ma yam guto i Kricito aye ma gibikwoŋo cer, 	For the Lord himself will come down from heaven, with a loud command, with the voice of the archangel and with the trumpet call of God, and the dead in Christ will rise first.
myerro onongo akel cilling pyerabic ento abummu woko ki cillig abic akello dong cillig pyeragwen wiye abic keken	i should have brought fifty shillings but I swindled five shillings and instead I brought forty five shillings only
Yam alego Rwot pi man tyen adek ni jami macalo meno oa woko ki i koma. 	I will boast about a man like that, but I will not boast about myself, except about my weaknesses.
rum conggi piny ka dong i leggi 	kneel down and then pray 
giwacci ni lacoone laywaa bet woko ki ipoto, ci miyo pe dong go maber, kace i daa kwedde 	it is said that, the man has magical power of stopping the millet in the field from growing well, if you quarrel With him 
tem tong ki kwot wek pe opoti 	prop up the spear with the shield to prevent it from falling
oaa ka tyet bot ajwaka 	he came from a diviner for consultation 
pien gin pe gitwero ciro cik ma giketo, ni meno, “Kadi ki lee mo ka ogudo got, myero gicel ki gweŋ ginek woko.” 	because they could not bear what was commanded: “If even an animal touches the mountain, it must be stoned to death.”
I kare meno onoŋo tye jo mogo kunnu ma gutitte pi Lugalilaya mogo ma yam Pilato orubo remogi kigitumgi. 	Now there were some present at that time who told Jesus about the Galileans whose blood Pilate had mixed with their sacrifices.
awobe myero inengi macalo omegini, 	Do not rebuke an older man harshly, but exhort him as if he were your father
pig wange ojaar woko  	tears started running down his face
ngol bongo me akwoya	cut the cloth for tailoring
camme mit mada	her food was very nice 
dano ma wiye oballe kit meno wiye pe lyedde 	the head of a mental case like that cannot be shaved 
Meno aye pwony ma noŋŋe i lok me kwena maber ma yam gimiya me atita, lok maber ma tito pi deyo pa Lubaŋa ma gipwoyo. 	for the sexually immoral, for those practicing homosexuality, for slave traders and liars and perjurers—and for whatever else is contrary to the sound doctrine
pot boo ma odong pud gwedde 	the remaining leaves of cowpeas can still be plucked 
tin gujwatte ki kedi ma pe wacce ki i olet 	today they beat one another with sticks in the grazing field
Yub pa Lubaŋa ma en bicobo ka karene oromo, en aye me coko jami ducu ma tye i polo ki i wi lobo, ki ribogi woko kacel i Kricito. 	he made known to us the mystery of his will according to his good pleasure, which he purposed in Christ,
tweyo pall nyo bongo matek ki del nido pyer dano woko 	tying tightly a pair of trousers or any cloth with belt also makes the waist small
pe wubedo ki lokke i iwu, pien pe wuye ŋat ma en ooro. 	You have never heard his voice nor seen his form,
piny tin tye ka yimme ayimma 	today the sky is heavily loaded with dark clouds, or today there is heavy overcast of cloud in the sky
Ka onoŋe, ada awaco botwu ni, cwinye bibedo yom pire makato pi romi pyeraboŋwen wiye aboŋwen ma pe onoŋo gurwenyo-ni. 	And if he finds it, truly I tell you, he is happier about that one sheep than about the ninety-nine that did not wander off.
ci gudaŋŋe matek	They cried out,
aita maarro cammo pul mada ma gipitto i poto	the ground squirrel loves eating groundnuts in the fields very much 
lub kor lee ma okatto kany 	pursue the animal which has passed through here 
twoone omollo komme twatwal 	the illness has affected him very much, he is wasted and weak, or the illness has debilitated him very much
pyel cuka man i wii lawotte 	lay this sheet on top of the other
Ka lwak oneno lanyut ma en otiyo, guwaco ni, “Ada, man en lanebi meno ma bino i lobo.” 	So they gathered them and filled twelve baskets with the pieces of the five barley loaves left over by those who had eaten.
wuwaarre woko ki kany wucit cen 	clear away from here and go away or elsewhere
ka doŋ lacen i ŋeye Jon olokke odoko caden me lok ma Lubaŋa owaco, dok caden i kom lok me caden ma yam Yecu Kricito omiyo, kun bene otito pi gin ducu ma en oneno. 	who testifies to everything he saw—that is, the word of God and the testimony of Jesus Christ.
ladit tye katenne ki kicaa pamba ma giketto ingeye 	the old man is leaning on a bag of cotton placed behind him 
puk con, odiko con, miyo imatto yamo magic mamit me odiko 	to rise very early in the morning is very good, it makes you breathe in the fresh, cold, nice air of the morning
Kit meno, ka iŋeyo ni an abedo lawoti, myero igame i kit ma kono igama kwede. 	Perhaps the reason he was separated from you for a little while was that you might have him back forever—
Myero wuŋe ni jo ma tye ki niye, gin aye likwayo pa Abraim kikome. 	So also Abraham “believed God, and it was credited to him as righteousness.”
Jo ducu ma gubedo i Lukiko guciko waŋgi i kome, ci guneno waŋe calo wan lamalaika.	All who were sitting in the Sanhedrin looked intently at Stephen, and they saw that his face was like the face of an angel.
dano tika tye i ot?  	anybody really in the house? 
timme pa litino cukul me nino man dong pe ber wacel 	the behaviour of the present school children is not good at all
An yam cwinya pe opukke i kom lim pa ŋat mo kadi ki ginarukane. 	I have not coveted anyone’s silver or gold or clothing.
dong candukke twerro yabbe 	the box can be opened 
nyom en aye gin maber ma dano ma mitto beddo wek giworre ci myerro onyom 	marriage is a good thing, which anybody who wants to be respected, he must marry
Giyenyo Yecu, kun giloko kekengi ma gicuŋ i ot pa Lubaŋa ni, “Wutamo niŋniŋ? Nyo en pe bibino pi nino madit?” 	When it was almost time for the Jewish Passover, many went up from the country to Jerusalem for their ceremonial cleansing before the Passover.
Myero gipwo Lubaŋa, Won Rwotwa Yecu Kricito, pien i Kricito doŋ omiyowa kit gum me cwiny ducu ma tye i polo. 	Grace and peace to you from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
taun con ononggo gilwonggo ni boma 	town was formerly called boma
Ci Lubaŋa otiyo taŋo madoŋo ki i ciŋ Paulo. 	God did extraordinary miracles through Paul,
In lamiŋmiŋ! Kodi ma icoyo i potoni pe twero noŋo kwo nio ka doŋ oto woko. 	How foolish! What you sow does not come to life unless it dies.
aweno pe cikke pien wanggi tek mada ginenno owic woko 	it is very difficult for the guinea fowls to be trapped because they usually see the traps
Ka ce dano mo lewic omake i koma ki i lokka i kare man me bal ki weko Lubaŋa, Wod pa dano bene lewic bimake i kome i kare ma en bidwogo ki deyo pa Wonne kacel ki lumalaika maleŋ.”	If anyone is ashamed of me and my words in this adulterous and sinful generation, the Son of Man will be ashamed of them when he comes in his Father’s glory with the holy angels.”
coo poto 	the field's boundary
lakwena pa gabumente me Uganda lye kwene? 	where is the envoy of Uganda's government?
litino gimaarro cello winyi ki abutkia mada	the children love very much to shoot birds with the catapults
ka obeddo mabe ci onyo ki otyeno nogo dong watye kacam 	if all remain well, at this time, we will be eating in the evening
gucitto ka werro wer 	they went to sing songs 
kom agulu matto pi, ci pii ne jwiine katto woko i komme ni jwu, ci dyako komme woko 	the wall of the pot absorbs the water and the water percolates through making its body wet
man Rwot aye ma otiyo, obedo botwa lok me aura’?” 	the Lord has done this, and it is marvelous in our eyes’?”
kikopo man pat ki kikopo maca 	this cup is different from the other one there 
tin iwekko doggola lapero pe ilorro	today you left the door open, you did not shut it
pirro yoo gudo 	levelling the road 
lokke otonno cwinynye mada 	the matter annoyed him very much
wek jo ma tye woko gupwo kitwu, dok gin mo pe myero orem ki botwu. 	so that your daily life may win the respect of outsiders and so that you will not be dependent on anybody.
Pien ka tic ma miyo kop loyo dano tye ki deyo, ci tic ma miyo gikwano dano ni kitgi atir deyone pe doŋ kato maca woko? 	will not the ministry of the Spirit be even more glorious?
twoo ma aa pi untie en aye kello luur 	sexually transmitted disease is the one that causes sterility 
gud bongone ki cinggi ka wek iniang berre 	touch the cloth with your fingers in order to appreciate it's quality
gilwonggo ni latworo pien yibbe ma taarri nen callo tol tworo ma gitweyo i yibbe 	it is called latworo because its white tail looks like the fibres of sisal which is tied on its tail
Wujol dano ma niyene goro, ento pe wupyem kwede i kom tam mogo ma en tamo. 	Do we, then, nullify the law by this faith? Not at all! Rather, we uphold the law.
oddi adli ma dong wugerro? 	how many houses have you constructed? 
laber wange ryeny	the eye of the beautiful one dazzled, is lost, cannot see well
Ento can pa Turo ki Cidon bibedo twaratwara i nino me ŋolo kop, makato can ma bipoto i komi. 	But it will be more bearable for Tyre and Sidon at the judgment than for you.
Lubaŋa pe gituko kwede. Gin ma dano ocoyo, en aye bene en bikayo. 	Do not be deceived: God cannot be mocked
Askari bene gupenye ni, “Wan kono watim aŋo” En owaco botgi ni, “Pe wuyak ŋatti ki tek, pe wudot dano mo ki lok goba, wek mucarawu oromwu.” 	Then some soldiers asked him, “And what should we do?” He replied, “Don’t extort money and don’t accuse people falsely—be content with your pay.”
latinne lagwette mada, mitto riggo ki pikipiki kun pe ngeyo ringgo kwedde 	the child is an imposter, he wants to ride a motorcycle which he does not know how to ride
ononggo nakanen watye ka kwan ka kot ocakko cweer 	the rain started to rain when we were reading 
Owaco bot dako ni, ‘Balli doŋ giweko.’” 	Then Jesus said to her, “Your sins are forgiven.”
Pien Kricito yam oto ka doki obedo kwo wek ebed Rwot pa jo muto ki jo makwo. 	So, whether we live or die, we belong to the Lord.
yang i kare macon dano ononggo gimaarro kwoyo pali ma pyergi lac ci ka girukko pall meno ci gilyerro alyerra i pal gwokgi ki kaba, pe gitweyo dong pyer paligi ki del 	in the past people used to make pair of their trousers with a wide opening at the waists and when they are wearing them, they suspend them over their shoulders with braces and they do not tie their waists with Leather belts 
Pien ka cero jo muto pe, noŋo Kricito bene yam pe gicero. 	For if the dead are not raised, then Christ has not been raised either.
Ka Barnaba ki Caulo gudwogo ki i Jerucalem ma doŋ gucobo tic ma giorogi iye, ci gukelo Jon ma nyiŋe mukene Marako.	When Barnabas and Saul had finished their mission, they returned from Jerusalem, taking with them John, also called Mark.
Dano acel acel gimiyo bote lanyut me Cwiny ma konyo lwak. 	Now to each one the manifestation of the Spirit is given for the common good.
lub ki korre kama obotte ocakke lye nio ka ma ogik iye 	mark has started up to where it has ended
An alokke adoko lamerokwu pi tito botwu lok me ada? 	Where, then, is your blessing of me now? I can testify that, if you could have done so, you would have torn out your eyes and given them to me.
Doŋ ka lok me kwenawa tito ni gicero Kricito ki i kin jo muto, piŋo jo mogo i kinwu giwaco ni cer pa jo muto pe tye? 	But if it is preached that Christ has been raised from the dead, how can some of you say that there is no resurrection of the dead?
mon mewu gucitto ka twommo pii i kulo 	your wives have gone to draw water from 
wec me wii leelani okonyi mada yokke ki motoka 	the turning away of your bicycle saved you from being knocked by a car
warre ducu pat pat 	all the shoes were different 
pii potto oduru tworo ka agulone pe gilwokko jwi jwi 	the water becomes filled with concentrated algae if the pot is not frequently washed
kel wunu gweng madwong me gerro ot 	bring many quartz pebbles for building the house
ka wee dyang girubbo ki lobo agulu ci puyo dye ot maber mada 	when cowdung is mixed with clay, it becomes very good mortar for plastering of the floor
Dako owacce ni, “Aŋeyo ni Meciya bibino (en ma gilwoŋo Kricito)	God is spirit, and his worshipers must worship in the Spirit and in truth.”
Kit meno atito botwu ni, bibedo yomcwiny madit twatwal i wi polo i kom labalo acel ma oŋut, makato i kom jo pyeraboŋwen wiye aboŋwen ma kitgi atir ma pe mito ŋut. 	I tell you that in the same way there will be more rejoicing in heaven over one sinner who repents than over ninety-nine righteous persons who do not need to repent.
Jon owaco bot lwak ma gubino bote pi batija ni, “Wun litino ororo, aŋa ma otito botwu ni wuriŋ kiniga ma mito bino? 	John said to the crowds coming out to be baptized by him, “You brood of vipers! Who warned you to flee from the coming wrath?
gwel lem Latin wek Men ka nyerro 	stroke the child's cheek and see if he laughs
i kare ma gia ki male i Cudan, jii mogo gupokke gudok tung Abicinia 	when they were coming down from upper Sudan, some of the people separated themselves and went towards Abyssinia
Wuti tic ducu laboŋo ŋuru nyo pyem mo, 	for it is God who works in you to will and to act in order to fulfill his good purpose.
tuny bye man woko 	break and scatter the earth of this anthill
Lupwonnye gubedo ka laro lok kekengi kun giwacci, “Pe watye ki mugati.” 	They discussed this with one another and said, “It is because we have no bread.”
Ento Petero obedo ka lubo kor Yecu ki cencen, nio kwede wa i dyekal pa ajwaka madit	But Peter followed him at a distance, right up to the courtyard of the high priest
ic ma odeng pe ber	a big belly is not good
“Piŋo wulwoŋa ni, ‘Rwot, Rwot,’ kun pe wutiyo gin ma acikowu? 	“Why do you call me, ‘Lord, Lord,’ and do not do what I say?
danone ladikke mada ogallowa owekko laworo waoo ka tukko been 	he is a man who does not make up his mind quickly to move, he delayed us and made us come late for the game
dok myero gitit lok i kom ŋut ma kelo weko bal i nyiŋe bot rok ducu kun gicako ki i Jerucalem. 	He told them, “This is what is written: The Messiah will suffer and rise from the dead on the third day,
yoone ogom mada, Hugo iye ki lela tek twatwal 	the road is too bent, it is very difficult to ride on it with a bicycle 
opego jukko komme ki daba	the pig smears its body with mud 
Kono nene Rwot pe ojwiko nino-nu obedo manok mo, kono dano mo pe obwot	“If the Lord had not cut short those days, no one would survive
Pien macalo dano ducu to i Adam, en i kit yo acel-lu jo ducu gibimiyogi kwo i Kricito. 	For as in Adam all die, so in Christ all will be made alive.
Ka guwinyo ni en tye gire makwo, dok ni otyeko nyutte, kome onen bot Maliam, pe guye lokke. 	When they heard that Jesus was alive and that she had seen him, they did not believe it.
Pien Luparicayo ki Lujudaya ducu ka pe gulogo ciŋgi kakare pe gicamo, pien gumako kit pa ludoŋo 	(The Pharisees and all the Jews do not eat unless they give their hands a ceremonial washing, holding to the tradition of the elders.
Jo ma gucamo mugati giromo co alip abic. 	The number of the men who had eaten was five thousand.
wubicakko reggo awene? 	when will you start grinding? 
wer lyel 	funeral songs 
cam ma nok miyo latin nweng 	little food makes the child very small 
romme meegi ni i Rom obeddo me gum mada 	their meeting in Rome was of a great luck indeed 
Dano mukwoŋo yam gitiyo ki apwa me lobo, ento dano me aryone oa ki i polo. 	The first man was of the dust of the earth; the second man is of heaven.
kagudonynyo i poto kaki gicammo woko liweng	the eating of adwek is terrible
lyak wanggi ki moo ma ngwecce kuur en 	smear your face with this sweet smelling oil 
aecitto ka jom 	I am going to take a bath 
Kit macalo doŋ watye ki ajwaka madit twatwal ma doŋ otyeko donyo i polo, en Yecu, Wod pa Lubaŋa, pi meno myero wamok matek i niye ma watuco. 	Therefore, since we have a great high priest who has ascended into heaven, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold firmly to the faith we profess.
ŋat ma omayo kanyini, pe itwonne koti bene. 	If someone takes your coat, do not withhold your shirt from them.
amitto citto pa oca diki ka nenno maarra ma komme lit 	I want to go to my wife's home tomorrow to see my mother-in-law who is ill
ka ce onoŋo wutamo kit meno, ci doŋ wujola macalo dano mamiŋ, wek omiya bene anyatte manoknok. 	I repeat: Let no one take me for a fool
yuc me mayembe ma nunmu pe ber 	plucking unripe mangoes is not good
I kare ma doŋ ocako kwano wel, ci gikelo ŋat mo acel ma onoŋo tye ki banyane ma romo milion mapol ata. 	As he began the settlement, a man who owed him ten thousand bags of gold was brought to him.
onoŋo gicamo, gimato, giwilo jami, gicato jami, gipito ginapita, gigero odi	People were eating and drinking, buying and selling, planting and building.
I kare ma gitye kunnu, kare me nywalle oromo. 	While they were there, the time came for the baby to be born,
Ento Juda me Keriot, ŋat acel i kin lupwonnyene, en ma bidobe, openyo ni, 	And the house was filled with the fragrance of the perfume.
tot me puti apar wiiye aboro mitte me ywayo motoka ma opotto i bur 	a rope of eighteen feet is needed for pulling out the car from where it has overturned into the ditch
wek dano ducu ma ye en olim kwo ma pe tum.” 	Just as Moses lifted up the snake in the wilderness, so the Son of Man must be lifted up,
kong ibed kenyo pi tutunu 	sit there for the time being 
lokke pud dong giryebbo piny 	at the moment the matter has been put aside or to rest or into cold storage 
rwido tol matek	to tie the rope tightly
“Tit botwa, lok man bitimme wa awene, dok kit gin aŋo ma binyuto ni lok meno doŋ cok cobbe kakare?” 	“Tell us, when will these things happen? And what will be the sign that they are all about to be fulfilled?”
en bene otimmo twal	he did it also 
Yecu ocako bolo carolok man bot lwak ni, “Yam tye dano mo ma opito olok i potone, ci oweko bot lupur, ocito woko wa i lobo mukene, ori kunnu pi kare malac. 	He went on to tell the people this parable: “A man planted a vineyard, rented it to some farmers and went away for a long time.
Owok i dye lobo meno kun cuko cwiny dano ki lok mapol, ka oo i lobo pa jo Grik. 	He traveled through that area, speaking many words of encouragement to the people, and finally arrived in Greece,
Ka doŋ gityeko kwano cik pa Moses ki lok pa lunebi, ci ludito me kacokke gucwalo lok botgi kun gipenyogi ni, “Utmego, ka wutye ki lok mo me cuko cwiny dano, ci wuwaci.” 	After the reading from the Law and the Prophets, the leaders of the synagogue sent word to them, saying, “Brothers, if you have a word of exhortation for the people, please speak.”
Ento i kare ma ajwagi madito pa Lubaŋa ki lupwony-cik guneno gin me aura ma en otiyo, ki litino ma daŋŋe i ot pa Lubaŋa kun giwaco ni, “Ojana, wupak Lakwar Daudi!” man omiyo kiniga omakogi matek. 	The blind and the lame came to him at the temple, and he healed them.
got wang it maleng 	dig and clean up the water well 
Ci en bioro lumalaikane ka coko jone ma en oyero, kun gicokogi ki i twok piny aŋwen ducu, nia kwede wa i agikki lobo nio kwede wa i agikki polo. 	And he will send his angels and gather his elect from the four winds, from the ends of the earth to the ends of the heavens.
Pi meno ka giloko ajwaka, ci cik bene myero gilok woko. 	For when the priesthood is changed, the law must be changed also.
Waraga man oa ki bot Petero, lakwena pa Yecu Kricito. Bot jo pa Lubaŋa ma guket woko ata, ma gubedo welo i Ponto, Galatia, Kapadokia, Acia ki Bitunia, 	So then, those who suffer according to God’s will should commit themselves to their faithful Creator and continue to do good.
Ento ka Yecu owinyo, owacce ni, “Pe ilwor, ye ayeya keken, ci en bicaŋ.” 	Hearing this, Jesus said to Jairus, “Don’t be afraid; just believe, and she will be healed.”
Ka warabo ŋet latin cula mo ma nyiŋe Kauda watemo ki tek me laro yeya. 	As we passed to the lee of a small island called Cauda, we were hardly able to make the lifeboat secure,
Pien doggola ma tero dano i kwo diŋ, ki yone bene rac, dok jo ma noŋo yo meno ginok. 	If you, then, though you are evil, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more will your Father in heaven give good gifts to those who ask him!
nyebbo litino marac ki cammo ringo keken 	to farmiliarise children badly in eating only meat 
litino ducu gimaarro lyerre mada i aligo 	all the children love swinging on the rope very much
Lujudaya guero pyem i kingi kekengi, kun giwaco ni, “Dano man twero miyowa kome me acama niŋniŋ?” 	But here is the bread that comes down from heaven, which anyone may eat and not die.
akwotta man dong ocek olobi 	the swelling is now ready, that is now soft, fluctuant and pointing
ogoyo wiye ni pac ci opwacco woko 	he hit his head with a loud sound and lacerated it
kongo tye ka cek 	the beer is fermenting
lapok gweno 	a breast of a chicken and other birds
En biculo dano acel acel kun lubo kit tic ma dano mo-ni otiyo. 	But because of your stubbornness and your unrepentant heart, you are storing up wrath against yourself for the day of God’s wrath, when his righteous judgment will be revealed.
awobe gucitto ka myel i keny pa lameegi gi  	the boys went to dance at the wedding of their sister 
danone oding ma kaddi iwacce ni pe otim gin moni, timmo aye, pe parro ni giryamme nyo gitimme iye gin moo 	the man is very stubborn, even if you tell him not to do something, he will do it again, he does not care whether he will be discharged or something will be done to him
waarre twerro porre ka rommo tyenni 	the shoes can be tried if they fit your feet 
Ki i tamma, aneno ni lukwena madoŋo ma gukato kare ca pe gikata kadi ki acel. 	For if someone comes to you and preaches a Jesus other than the Jesus we preached, or if you receive a different spirit from the Spirit you received, or a different gospel from the one you accepted, you put up with it easily enough.
lacaka caka	it a sauce made of a mixture of cowpeas leaves with pounded raw simsim or raw groundnuts and then cooked, it makes very good vegetable sauce  
man jami me tango mada 	this is a wonderful thing 
parro mada gin angoo ma myero etim 	meditating very much as to what he should do
Gulwoŋŋe kengi ni gin luryeko, ento gulokke dok gudoko lumiŋ. 	For although they knew God, they neither glorified him as God nor gave thanks to him, but their thinking became futile and their foolish hearts were darkened.
mon macon ononggo yang girukko mada ogul mola i gut cinggi 	the women of long times ago used to wear very much brasslets
Ka jo ma gucako tic i cawa apar wiye acel-li gubino, ci dano acel acel i kingi ogamo mucara me nino acel kulu. 	“The workers who were hired about five in the afternoon came and each received a denarius.
agulu pii lobo matto pii ci jwiine katti wa woko i geye 	earthen pot absorbs the water and the water permeates through it to the body outskie 
minicita en ngat acel i kom luditto pa gabumnte ma loyo dul me toe macaalo minicita me yot kom 	a minister is one of the important members of the government who is responsible for a government 
kit purre me makko dano ni pe ber 	the way of suddenly arresting the people is not good 
Natanael odokke iye ni, “Lapwony, in giri i Wod pa Lubaŋa. In i Kabaka me Icrael!” 	When Jesus saw Nathanael approaching, he said of him, “Here truly is an Israelite in whom there is no deceit.”
Mumiyo utmegina, watye ki banya, ento pe me kit pa dano, me lubo kit pa dano. 	And if the Spirit of him who raised Jesus from the dead is living in you, he who raised Christ from the dead will also give life to your mortal bodies because of his Spirit who lives in you.
dakone maarro gwkido lok ni put put ka gijukke timmo gin mo marac 	when the woman is stopped from doing something bad, she persists on talking for a long time 
geerre ne omiyo dano pe gimitto tic botte 	his cruelty made people not wish to work for him 
Ka inen guketo ayela i komwu i gaŋ acel, ci wuriŋ woko i gaŋ ma cok kwede	When you are persecuted in one place, flee to another
ni as ki inja ni oo Kampala rommo mairo pyera bic 	from Jinja to Kampala is about fifty miles
I kare ma guo i kabedo ma gilwoŋo ni Golgota, ma te lokke ni kabedo me cogo wic, 	As they were going out, they met a man from Cyrene, named Simon, and they forced him to carry the cross.
lapim bor piny tye atir	the ruler is straight 
pot oummo wang ceng woko 	the clouds have covered the sun's sight
moo bel i Iaa wek otwoo iye  	spread the corn on the hide so as to make it dry there
leg tyen mejane woko  	loosen the table's leg
lok ma kiteno twerro miyo dano lweny 	such talk can incite people to fight
Ci lwak ma gucokke gujolo lok ma Pilipo otito botgi ki cwiny acel i kare ma guwinyo, kun gineno bene lanyut ma en otiyo. 	When the crowds heard Philip and saw the signs he performed, they all paid close attention to what he said.
litino ducu dong gubutto aryebba ic i wii kitanda meggi pi kec ma ononggo dong nekkongi twatwal 	all the children were lying on their stomachs because of the hunger that they were feeling
wotte tye diki	his journey is tomorrow 
pe dok wuye rwako tyenwu i okol me opii. 	It is for freedom that Christ has set us free
a malo ipet kabutoni.” Ci otugi a malo oyot. 	Get up and roll up your mat.” Immediately Aeneas got up.
Doŋ macalo waruko cal pa dano ma gitiyo ki ŋom, kit meno bene wabiruko cal pa dano ma oa ki i polo. 	And just as we have borne the image of the earthly man, so shall we bear the image of the heavenly man.
Myero doŋ watamu pi gin ma kelo kuc ki gin ma doŋo niyewa i kinwa kekenwa. 	because anyone who serves Christ in this way is pleasing to God and receives human approval.
Gigure kacel ki luyak mogo aryo, dano acel tuŋ lacuc ki acel tuŋ lacam. 	Above his head they placed the written charge against him: this is jesus, the king of the jews.
latinne maarro kwanno buk mada 	the child loves to read books 
danone la kiniga mada nino ducu tube oyot mada ka Iweny i lok ma teere peke 	the man is a short tempered person, he easily falls out into fighting for nothing
en maarro cungge mada i kabeddo mape rommo beddo iye 	he always pushes himself to a place where he does not fit to be seen
pol oummo wang cen woko 	the clouds have hiden the sun 
Yecu oa woko ki botgi, ci odonyo i yeya, oŋolo nam okato wa loka ca. 	Then he left them, got back into the boat and crossed to the other side.
latinne pe tye ka pugi maber pien cak pa minne pe 	the child is not gaining weight well because the mother has no milk 
latin pa ngadi tye ka mal ni pang pang i Kampala pe tye gin ma myero otii 	so and so's child is walking about aimlessly in Kampala and has no work to do
twoo nyac okonggo bad latin wonko 	yaws infection has caused the deformity ot the child's arm
gwok man dong komme opong ki okodo keken 	this dog's body is full of ticks 
kun gimote ni, “Itye ba, kabaka pa Lujudaya!” 	And they began to call out to him, “Hail, king of the Jews!”
ot kacokke-ne laac rommo dano maber 	the hall is spacious enough for people to fit in well
cukulgi giloro woko pien two adongi omakko litino aryo iye	their school was closed because two students in the school have been infected by the disease
lyec turu yen me talle	the elephant breaks down the tree for smoking its own flesh
omiyo guye odonyo i yeya. Cutcut yeya oo i wi tera ka ma gimito cito iye. 	But he said to them, “It is I; don’t be afraid.”
Magi ducu gubedo tipo keken ma nyuto gin ma bibino, ento kom gin meno tye bot Kricito. 	Therefore do not let anyone judge you by what you eat or drink, or with regard to a religious festival, a New Moon celebration or a Sabbath day.
mu kwon ki gwok wek obag 	give kwon to the dog to eat it
man en aye cuma me ngollo bao, me pakko lak palaa ki mukene 	this is the machine for cutting i sewing woods and so on 
Doŋ atyeko lwenyo lweny maber, atyeko cobo ŋwecca, dok agwoko bene niye. 	They will turn their ears away from the truth and turn aside to myths.
mon matino myerro kong gipwonynyogi kit me colle me nywal	young women should first be taught the process of delivering 
Koko dano, ma en aye weko bal, a ki bote. 	For he has rescued us from the dominion of darkness and brought us into the kingdom of the Son he loves,
Adada awacciwu ni, dano mo ma bimiyowu pii me amata i kikopo, pien wun jo pa Kricito, limo motte pe biloyo en kadi matidi mo. 	Truly I tell you, anyone who gives you a cup of water in my name because you belong to the Messiah will certainly not lose their reward.
citto ka libbo lee	to go to stalk the animal
Openye tyen me aryo ni, “Cimon wod pa Jon, in imara?” En ogamo ni, “Iyo Rwot, in iŋeyo an amari.” Ocike ni, “Gwok romina.” 	When they had finished eating, Jesus said to Simon Peter, “Simon son of John, do you love me more than these?” “Yes, Lord,” he said, “you know that I love you.” Jesus said, “Feed my lambs.”
awobi ma lakwoo pe mitte kany 	a boy who is a thief is not wanted here 
wamitto dano ma lokko lok conynya botwa kany 	we do not want a man who uses abusive language among us here 
wangga yoo ma katto lokacaa tye kwene? 	where is the road that passes over there? 
Ci Yecu openyogi ni, “Wun kara peya wuniaŋ bene? 	Peter said, “Explain the parable to us.”
kama coo tye iye, ka imatto pii mape gimurro, ci coo makki woko 	if you drink unboiled water from an infested area, you get the guinea worm
Nyo wek jo man kikomgi gunyut gin marac ma gunoŋo i koma i kare ma acuŋ i nyim Lukiko. 	Or these who are here should state what crime they found in me when I stood before the Sanhedrin—
yo ducu ma i gaŋ gipeto ki jabu keken, ma nen leŋ calo kiyo. 	The great street of the city was of gold, as pure as transparent glass.
iyo ki geddone kene 	working hard building his house alone
tarane menynyo piny maleng mada 	the lamp illuminates very well 
joo pa ywecca	the people of my sister in law
wangge odwet 	he has weeping eyes 
doggola candukke twerro pungge 	the lid of the box can be shut
ringgo tic cing woko 	to run away from manual labour 
Dako man, ma en nya pa Abraim,, ma ceŋ Catan otweye pi mwaka apar wiye aboro kulu, pe myero gigonye ki i twec man i ceŋ cabit?” 	Then should not this woman, a daughter of Abraham, whom Satan has kept bound for eighteen long years, be set free on the Sabbath day from what bound her?”
bol carolokki wek wawiny 	present your proverb so that we may hear it
joo mukene gilworo Iwok ki pii ma ngic 	there are some people who fear bathing cold water 
joo mene ma tin lekko dyangi i puno ka cam 	dreams often of passing his examinations during the examinations
Yecu obedo i ot pa Lubaŋa ka ma okemme ki canduk me coko lim, ci obedo ka neno kit ma lwak gibolo ki motgi i canduk lim	Jesus sat down opposite the place where the offerings were put and watched the crowd putting their money into the temple treasury
labolo ka giteddo ocek twatwal ci nyotte woko 	if the plantain is over cooked, it is mashed 
gud ki cinggi ka wek ingee ka lyet nyo ngic 	touch with your finger in order to know whether it is hot or cold 
lyec okatto kany laworo nen obotte tye ene 	look the elephant passed here yesterday, its foot marks are here 
Otto ganynyo aganynya 	Otto waddles when walking 
guruke ki boŋo me deyo, gudwoke kwede bot Pilato. 	Dressing him in an elegant robe, they sent him back to Pilate.
gwogi gin aye gitwerro tworro agulu ma i ot 	the dogs are the ones which can knock down the pots in the house
cwinyynye cwer 	he is aggrieved
rwee bongi man ducu maber 	iron all these clothes very well 
yug lok ki wan wek oyom cwinywa 	entertain us with some jokes
an atek, en aye omiyo pud atye kany, pien kono pe kiteno, kono dong acitto woko pi ayellawu 	I am strong, that is why I am still here, if it has not been so, I would have already left because of your troubles
parro mada ka latin tye ka kwan maber 	worrying very much if the child is studying well
Tomaci ogamo ni, “In i Rwoda ki Lubaŋana” 	Stop doubting and believe.”
Dok wuwaco ni, ‘Ka ce dano mo okwoŋo kwoŋ ki keno tyer, lok mo pe iye, ento ka ce ŋat mo okwoŋo ki mot ma giketo i wi keno tyer, kwoŋŋe-ni bimake woko gire.’ 	You blind fools! Which is greater: the gold, or the temple that makes the gold sacred?
Ka doŋ watyeko larre, ci waniaŋ ni cula meno gilwoŋo Molta. 	Once safely on shore, we found out that the island was called Malta.
Jo ma diyo cwinygi kun gicanne me tiyo gin maber, ma giyenyo deyo ki woro, ki kwo ma pe to, en bimiyo botgi kwo ma pe tum. 	God “will repay each person according to what they have done.”
apwa dong opong wii meja mada ma mitto adunya 	the children who play too much in the sand, dust gets into their eyes and so they get eye disease
Icaya owaco lok man pien oneno deyo mere, oloko pire, 	“He has blinded their eyes and hardened their hearts, so they can neither see with their eyes, nor understand with their hearts, nor turn—and I would heal them.”
man en aye gin mumiyo lewic pe mako Yecu me lwoŋogi ni omegine, 	So Jesus is not ashamed to call them brothers and sisters.
Ka nino okato abicel, ci Yecu otero Petero ki Yakobo ki Jon ominne, oito kwedgi i wi got mabor i muŋ gin kengi. 	And when they saw him, they pleaded with him to leave their region.
wacoyo waraga botte ci ento pud peya wanoggo lagam mo ki botte 	we wrote to him a letter but we have not yet received any reply from him
owanno tyenne 	he has hurt his foot
ot kanica ne lac ni wong 	the church is very wide or large
oyoo gupong kacammo ngido ngiddo mungati ma oo piny 	the rats have gathered to eat crumbs ot bread which dropped down
Adada, tye gin mo maber makato, en aye ŋeyo Rwotwa Yecu Kricito	But whatever were gains to me I now consider loss for the sake of Christ.
itye ka cunno nyako mene 	which girl are you courting
rugge oyot ka gilutto i pii 	the cloth is not good, it shrinks easily when put into water or dipped into water
Oilo waŋe ki i Lyel kun tye ki can, oneno Abraim tye ka mabor kun Lajaro ojeŋŋe i kore. 	Even the dogs came and licked his sores.
lacoone dok Iawakke mada pe mitto lok ki dano atata	he is a very proud fellow, he does not like to speak with ordinary people 
kadi ka ŋat mo tamo ni etwero bedo ki gen i kom gin ma nen ki woko, an gira aloye. 	though I myself have reasons for such confidence
poo jami ducu macon ma yang itiyo ci pieno myerro pe dong i par twatwal ni in dong pe ikonynyo i kare man 	remember all those good things which you did, therefore, do not feel depressed that you are now useless
Ka piny pud oru aruya, Yecu ocuŋ i wi tera, ento lupwonnyene pe giŋeyo ni en Yecu. 	Simon Peter, Thomas (also known as Didymus), Nathanael from Cana in Galilee, the sons of Zebedee, and two other disciples were together.
Jon yam batija dano ki pii, ento odoŋ nino manok ma wun gibibatijawu ki Cwiny Maleŋ.” 	For John baptized with water, but in a few days you will be baptized with the Holy Spirit.”
“Gitye ki gum jo ma kelo kuc, pien gin aye gibilwoŋogi ni litino pa Lubaŋa. 	Blessed are the peacemakers, for they will be called children of God.
ento pe dok wulok kucwu odok me cobo mit ma ginywalowu kwede. Ma ka timo meno, myero dano acel acel omine me konyo luwote pi mar keken. 	You, my brothers and sisters, were called to be free
en dano mager mada ci pieno alworre mada 	he is a fierce person therefore I fear him very much
Ento Maliam ocuŋ i ŋet lyel kun kok	Then the disciples went back to where they were staying.
ki kany dano acel acel myerro onenni egwokko mada gipinynye 	here every person must see that he looks very well after his belongings 
Dok wabako dogwa botwu, utmegiwa, wujuk jo ma balo kare laboŋo tic, wucuk cwiny jo ma cwinygi odoko nyap, wukony jo ma goro, wudi cwinywu bene i kom dano ducu. 	And we urge you, brothers and sisters, warn those who are idle and disruptive, encourage the disheartened, help the weak, be patient with everyone.
gubeddo ka penynye pi gim ma otimme kany 	they have been inquiring about what has happened here 
Amito wuŋe kit ma acukke kwede ka tic piwu, ki pi jo ma tye i Laodikia, kadi ki jo ducu ma pud peya guneno waŋa, 	but the people of Israel, who pursued the law as the way of righteousness, have not attained their goal.
piny tin orwenynye woko 	he is lost today or he has lost himself today
Guweko lwak, ci gukwaŋo en ki yeya ma onoŋo en tye iye-ni	Leaving the crowd behind, they took him along, just as he was, in the boat
Man otimme wek lok ma Yecu owaco ocobbe kakare, kun nyuto kit to ma ebito kwede. 	Pilate said, “Take him yourselves and judge him by your own law.” “But we have no right to execute anyone,” they objected.
gkiotte pi timmo abor ki dako pa lawotte	he was accused of committing adultery with his companion's wife
man en aye abila pa woorra	this is my father's shrine
“Pe tye ŋatti mo ma cwinyo tara ci kano i gul, nyo umo auma ki aduku	“No one lights a lamp and puts it in a place where it will be hidden, or under a bowl
pe wuwek tamwu ogwaŋŋe oyotoyot, cwinywu pe myero opoti, kadi pi lok ma wuwinyo ki bot lanebi mo nyo pi lok ma gitito, nyo kadi pi waraga mo ma giwaco ni oa ki botwa, ma tito ni, nino pa Rwot doŋ oo. 	not to become easily unsettled or alarmed by the teaching allegedly from us—whether by a prophecy or by word of mouth or by letter—asserting that the day of the Lord has already come.
gitye kakwillo lok akwilla	they are whispering to each other
ento ber icit ci icinyutte keni bot ajwaka pa Lubaŋa, wek imi gityer pi komi ma doŋ ocaŋ-ŋi, kit ma yam Moses ociko, wek obed lanyut botgi. 	But go, show yourself to the priest and offer the sacrifices that Moses commanded for your cleansing, as a testimony to them.”
gupenynyo Okullo twatwal kace onogo ngeyo gin ma otimme 	they interrogated Okullo thoroughly if he knew what happened
yam maro jone ma tye i lobo man	It was just before the Passover Festival
ento i nino ma Lot oa woko ki i Codom mac ki gweŋ calfa ma mac oliyo ocwer ki i polo, otyekogi ducu. 	But the day Lot left Sodom, fire and sulfur rained down from heaven and destroyed them all.
dano gumer mada ki arege 	the people were very drunk on the local gin
rotto lee 	tracking the animal
Cen opotto i komme omiyo opoo woko 	the spirit has fallen upon him which made him mad 
en pe ngeyo wot ki karakap	he does not know how to walk with wooden sandals 
Ka ce dano gibicer woko ki i kin jo muto, ci doŋ pe gibinyomme, doŋ gibibedo macalo lumalaika ma i polo. 	When the dead rise, they will neither marry nor be given in marriage; they will be like the angels in heaven.
En otimo man ducu wek enyut i kare ducu ma pud tye anyim lonyone madwoŋ ma pe pimme me kica, ma onen ki berre botwa i Kricito Yecu. 	And God raised us up with Christ and seated us with him in the heavenly realms in Christ Jesus,
tungwa tye loka caa 	our home is over (the river) there
ngat man tye ki lakit wer ma en kutto mamiyo gigeye kwedde 	every person has a song, which he blows that makes people recognise him to be identified 
Ka doŋ gicamo otum, Yecu openyo Cimon Petero ni, “Cimon wod pa Jon, in imara makato jo-ni?” En ogamo ni, “Iyo, Rwot, in iŋeyo an amari.” Ocike ni, “Kwa litino romina.” 	This was now the third time Jesus appeared to his disciples after he was raised from the dead.
pien bibino i kom jo ducu ma bedo i wi lobo ducu. 	For it will come on all those who live on the face of the whole earth.
Gupennye kekengi ni, “Cwinywa nakanen pe obedo ka pukke i kare ma en tye ka lok kwedwa i waŋayo, kun yabbiwa ginacoya?” 	When he was at the table with them, he took bread, gave thanks, broke it and began to give it to them.
latin myerro pe ocak kwanyo you marac me wot atata nyo kwallo cam akwalla 	a child must not start developing a bad habit of walking about or stealing food
ci wubilimo mot me Cwiny Maleŋ. 	And you will receive the gift of the Holy Spirit.
motto dano yoo mape ingeyogi pe ber 	greeting people in the street whom you don't know is not good
Cen marac oryeye ki koko matek, ka oa woko ki i kome.	The impure spirit shook the man violently and came out of him with a shriek.
dwanni twerro yikke maber me wer 	your voice can be well prepared for singing 
awobe i kare man dong gitye ka nyommo anyira mada 	these days the boys are marrying many girls 
Macalo Won ceŋ omara, an bene amarowu kit meno	If you remain in me and my words remain in you, ask whatever you wish, and it will be done for you.
Kit macalo yam en oloko i buk pa Kocea ni, “Jo ma yam onoŋo gin pe jona, abilwoŋogi ni, ‘jona’, dako ma onoŋo yam pe amaro abilwoŋo ni, ‘dako ma amaro.’ ” 	even us, whom he also called, not only from the Jews but also from the Gentiles?
lyak odii ma pwot piwa me acamma 	grind the simsim into very smooth paste for us to eat
Kica pa Rwotwa Yecu Kricito, ki mar pa Lubaŋa, ki ribbe ma Cwiny Maleŋ kelo obed kwedwu ducu.	All God’s people here send their greetings.
ludito gubed wii lobele ento litino gubed piny i tee lobele 	the elders to sit on the platform but the children are to sit under the platform
winyo odonynyo woko ni twic i odde 	the bird entered its nest in an instant
wirro rwot ki moo me ker 	anointing the king with oil of kingship
Wupo i lok ma yam atito botwu ni, ‘Latic pe bedo dit makato laditte.’ Ka yam giliba, wun bene gibilibowu	That is why the world hates you.
Gudokke iye ni, “Pe tye ŋat mo ma nyiŋe calo meno i kin wadiwu ducu do.” 	They said to her, “There is no one among your relatives who has that name.”
ka tye ka koko, ci oguŋo, oŋiyo i lyel. 	Now Mary stood outside the tomb crying
Yam gicoyo ni, “Jo ducu ma gilwoŋo nyiŋ Rwot gibilarogi.” 	As Scripture says, “Anyone who believes in him will never be put to shame.”
mon We ka yerro muranga ma orubbe ki nyim 	the women are picking out the beans which were mixed with simsim
En kweyo cwinywa i can ducu ma walimo wek wan bene wabed ki twero me kweyo cwiny jo ma tye ki can mo mapatpat, kun wakweyo cwinygi i kit yo acel-lu ma Lubaŋa okweyo kwede cwinywa-ni. 	Praise be to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of compassion and the God of all comfort,
Ka dok lamalaika mukene okatti ki i ot pa Lubaŋa, kun daŋŋe matek bot ŋat ma onoŋo obedo i wi pol-li ni, “Cwal ciŋi ika kac ki pala kacci, pien kare me kac doŋ oromo, ki gin ma gikayo i lobo bene doŋ ocek woko.” 	Then another angel came out of the temple and called in a loud voice to him who was sitting on the cloud, “Take your sickle and reap, because the time to reap has come, for the harvest of the earth is ripe.”
Kit macalo kombeddi wutye ki jami mabuppi, wukonygi i cangi, wek ka waŋ mo gin gubedo ki jami mabup, gin bene gubikonywu ki gin murem botwu, 	Our desire is not that others might be relieved while you are hard pressed, but that there might be equality.
myero lewic omakki mada ka larro cam ki litino 	you should be ashamed of yourself to fight over the food with the children
“Moses man onoŋo yam gukwero woko kun gipenyo ni, ‘Aŋa muketo in me bedo lalowa ki laŋolkopwa?’ Lubaŋa ocwale macalo laloc ki lalar ki i ciŋ lamalaika ma onen bote i cakani. 	“This is the same Moses they had rejected with the words, ‘Who made you ruler and judge?’ He was sent to be their ruler and deliverer by God himself, through the angel who appeared to him in the bush.
Gin ma miyo waniaŋ maber ni waŋeye en aye ni, wan wagwoko cikke. 	We know that we have come to know him if we keep his commands.
Pien lok me kwena maber nyuto kit ma Lubaŋa kwano ni dano bedo ma kite atir, ma man timme pi niye keken, cakke ki acakkine o kwede wa i agikkine. Kit macalo gicoyo ni, “Dano ma kite atir pi niye bibedo kwo.” 	For I am not ashamed of the gospel, because it is the power of God that brings salvation to everyone who believes: first to the Jew, then to the Gentile.
lak latin dong ogullo 	the child's teeth have appeared 
obwotto timme atata i kin dano 	he left misbehaving himself among the people
lawac kom nino ducu beddo merre ka leggo jami alegga pe tiyo meerre ki komme 	a lazy person always keeps on begging for things, he does not work for his things by himself 
lokke tonno cwinynye mada 	the matter annoys him very much
i igoye tonga  lee ki i twiny dano 	they sprinkle the mixture on the skull of the animal killed and on the abdomen (epigastrium) of the people
cekko me kongo kal terro nine aryo 	fermenting of millet beer takes two days
twee wang rette woko wek ogeg motoli cweer 	dress the laceration so that it may prevent the serous fluid from coming out
ranynyo lok pe ber ki mon 	to speak scornfully is not good for women
Ka oneno Yecu ki ka mabor, ci oriŋo, oryebbe i nyime, owore. 	When he saw Jesus from a distance, he ran and fell on his knees in front of him.
ngat ma petto piny twatwal nying ma gimiine en aye Apetti 	one who is always roaming about is given a name of Apetti
Pien kadi i kare ma onoŋo watye botwu, wamiyowu cik man ni, ŋat ma dag tic myero wutwon ki cam. 	For even when we were with you, we gave you this rule: “The one who is unwilling to work shall not eat.”
Ci Citefano ogamo ni, “Utmega ki utwora, wuwiny ya. Lubaŋa me deyo yam onyutte bot kwarowa Abraim ma onoŋo pud tye wa i Mecopotamia, ma peya obedo i Karan, 	To this he replied: “Brothers and fathers, listen to me! The God of glory appeared to our father Abraham while he was still in Mesopotamia, before he lived in Harran.
Pi mitine gire kene, en onywalowa ki lokke me ada, wek wabed calo cam ma i poto mukwoŋo cek ki i kin ginaketa ducu. 	He chose to give us birth through the word of truth, that we might be a kind of firstfruits of all he created.
itte opong ki odok 	his ears are full of wax 
ruc coc woko ki i kom bao 	wipe out the writings on the black-board 
pii tye ka jibbo i cupuria 	the water is bubbling in the aluminium saucepan
“Gitye ki gum jo ma giketo ayelayela i komgi pi bedo jo ma kitgi atir, pien ker me polo megi. 	Blessed are those who are persecuted because of righteousness, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.
Ma tye ki it me winyone, ci owiny.” 	If anyone has ears to hear, let them hear.
nyutte cal ma imakko 	show him the picture that you took
laworo alworro binno kunno ki wor pi adwii matye ka yello danoni 	I was afraid or feared to come there at night because of the terrorists who are still terrorising the people 
Pien ŋat ma doto cak pe tye ki ŋec mo ma dok i kom bedo ki kit ma atir, pien noŋo pud en latin. 	Anyone who lives on milk, being still an infant, is not acquainted with the teaching about righteousness.
Deyo, dit, loc ki twer ducu obed bot Lubaŋa acel keken, ma Lalarwa, pi Yecu Kricito Rwotwa, cakke ma peya giketo lobo, nio koni, ki kare ma pe gik. Amen.	To him who is able to keep you from stumbling and to present you before his glorious presence without fault and with great joy—
latin pud tye ka ginynyo gee minne ma yil 	the child is still scratching the back of her mother which is irritating
Pien gin ma a ki i cwiny dano, en aye bedo tam maraco, cot, kwalo kwo, nek, abor, 	For it is from within, out of a person’s heart, that evil thoughts come—sexual immorality, theft, murder,
en pudi ogak woko kakonye 	he has just gone out to ease himself,
otte pud pe ya gigerro otum, pud tye lapero 	the house is not yet completely built, it is still without windows and doors 
ento ŋat ma kwera i nyim dano, gibikwere bene i nyim lumalaika pa Lubaŋa. 	But whoever disowns me before others will be disowned before the angels of God.
Atamo ni can me kare man pe myero gipor ki deyo ma gibinyuto botwa. 	Now if we are children, then we are heirs—heirs of God and co-heirs with Christ, if indeed we share in his sufferings in order that we may also share in his glory.
tot me puti apar wiiye aboro mitte me ywayo motoka ma opotto i bur 	a rope of eighteen feet is needed for pulling out the car from where it has overturned into the ditch
agola gola i kare man pol mada ma gego dano timmo gin mo 	there are many problems nowadays which prevent people from doing some thing
pien onoŋo guwaco ni, “En tye ki cen marac.” 	He said this because they were saying, “He has an impure spirit.”
Lupwonnyene gugamo ni, “Ineno lwak tye ka diyo in, ka dok pud ipenyo ni, ‘Aŋa ma oguda?’ ” 	“You see the people crowding against you,” his disciples answered, “and yet you can ask, ‘Who touched me?’ ”
obeddo ka wirro lakodi moo moni ci obokko komme woko 	she has been smearing with a certain oil on her body and has turned his body brown  
Ento gimiyo bwom ocur madito aryo bot dako-nu, wek oa woko ki i nyim min kulu, otuk ocit woko i dye tim, i kabedone ca ka ma gibipite iye pi mwaka adek ki nucu. 	The woman was given the two wings of a great eagle, so that she might fly to the place prepared for her in the wilderness, where she would be taken care of for a time, times and half a time, out of the serpent’s reach.
Gimiyo twero bene bot lee-nu me loko lok mogo me wakke ki me yeto Lubaŋa, dok bene gimiye twero me tiyo gin ma iye mito pi dwe pyeraŋwen wiye aryo. 	The beast was given a mouth to utter proud words and blasphemies and to exercise its authority for forty-two months.
Oyabo tamgi wek giniaŋ ginacoya,, 	He said to them, “This is what I told you while I was still with you: Everything must be fulfilled that is written about me in the Law of Moses, the Prophets and the Psalms.”
Dano acel acel myero oŋe bedo ki dakone kene i cwiny maleŋ dok me woro. 	that each of you should learn to control your own body in a way that is holy and honorable,
Petero ki jo ma tye kacel kwedgi onoŋo nino omako waŋgi matek, ento gubedo ma waŋgi twolo, guneno deyone ki jo aryo ma gucuŋ kacel kwede. 	Peter and his companions were very sleepy, but when they became fully awake, they saw his glory and the two men standing with him.
rad oyoo ma gupongi ot tin 	kill all the rats today which have filled this house
Kadi bed yam awakke i nyime piwu, lewic pe omaka	So even though I wrote to you, it was neither on account of the one who did the wrong nor on account of the injured party, but rather that before God you could see for yourselves how devoted to us you are.
ka pe oyuyo taa ci pe nino, pieno kong yuyo ka dong nino 	if he has not inhaled the tobacco he will not sleep, therefore he first inhales or takes a puff at the tobacco before going to sleep
kac pa ajoga miya lit mada, ka ma okayo, remo kati iye	the biting of the mbwa fly is very painful, blood comes out at the site where it has bitten
Myero wami deyo bot Lubaŋa ma twero miyo wucuŋ matek, macalo apwonyo kwede i lok me kwena maber ma abedo ka titone-ni, ki lok ma gitito i kom Yecu Kricito. Muŋ man yam Lubaŋa okano oliŋ woko litik pi lwak mwaka mapol, ka lacen doŋ oyabo ka maleŋ. 	I, Tertius, who wrote down this letter, greet you in the Lord.
atero orabbo lee arabba 	the arrow glanced past the game 
awobi ojwetto ngwec mape wacce i kare ma ocom i kom labwor 	when the boy met the lion unexpectedly, he took to his heels and showed a clean pair of heels to the lion
Pien dano aye mukelo to, dok bene cer pa jo muto dano mukelo. 	For since death came through a man, the resurrection of the dead comes also through a man.
ocwak myerro gigurro matek matut wek pe oput woko oyotoyot ka lee omokko i obwoo 	the peg should be deeply planted and firm in the ground so that it will not be pulled out easily when an animal is caught in the ne
gimitto yen mabocco ma donggo me geddo 	they want tall big wood for building 
abok mwoddo emme	there is aching pain in her thighs
dako ma lwiro 	the woman who takes a long interval to conceive and bear children
ngaa ma ngeyo wic 	who knows how to whistle?
putto gwana 	to uproot the cassava
ka idag gin mo pe konynyo me jakko lok ajaka iye, wac atir ni adaggi 	if you don't like anything do not speak arrogantly about it, simply say I do not want it
Yecu ocikogi ni pe gutit ki ŋatti mo	Jesus commanded them not to tell anyone
koko pa lukac doŋ owinnye bot Rwot me mony. 	The cries of the harvesters have reached the ears of the Lord Almighty.
twon gwok pe ringo mwaka aryo	the bull dog does not run for two years
Lacen lamalaika me abirone okuto tumme, ci dwan mogo maloŋo owinnye i polo ma wacci, “Ker me lobo doŋ odoko ker pa Rwotwa ki Kricitone, en doŋ bibedo ka loc matwal.” 	The seventh angel sounded his trumpet, and there were loud voices in heaven, which said: “The kingdom of the world has become the kingdom of our Lord and of his Messiah, and he will reign for ever and ever.”
kama mkia tye iye I korre yil mada 	the place on the chest where ring worm is present, is very itchy
jalle pe mitto beddo i kin dano pien matto jai twatwal 	the fellow does not want to stay among the people because he smokes too much hang or marijuana
yeya ki agulo pii 	help me to put the water pot on my head
aye binno 	I agree to come
Ŋat ma oyubowa pi lok man kikome aye Lubaŋa, dok bene omiyowa Cwinye calo gin ma Lubaŋa omiyo ma moko ni en bicobo gin ma ociko. 	because when we are clothed, we will not be found naked.
bac tinggo dano mapol 	a bus carries many people 
oculi peddo gwinynye malac ci gweno nenno ci binno beddo ka tonggone ci makko wii gweno woko i gwinynye 	one of the small carnivores, member of the monngoose family, opens its anus very wkiely and a chicken comes and pecks it and its head is caught there in the carnivore's anus 
man dano ma nyap pe twerro tic ma mitto tek kom	this a lazy person who cannot do the work that needs strength 
kel pigi me tweyo chi lukwoo magi 	bring the handcuffs for handcuffing the hands of these thieves
Wun wucaden me lok man. 	and repentance for the forgiveness of sins will be preached in his name to all nations, beginning at Jerusalem.
Ka pe kumeno, en cwalo kwena ma kabaka ca pud tye ka mabor, pi ribbe kwede ki kuc. 	If he is not able, he will send a delegation while the other is still a long way off and will ask for terms of peace.
Lacwec lobo en aye Lubaga  	the maker of the earth is God
arem madwoŋ omiyo dano gukayo lebgi ma pe wacce, 	People gnawed their tongues in agony
a a pe kitmeno	no, not like that
Nakanen akele bot lupwonnyeni, ento caŋone oloyogi.” 	When they came to the crowd, a man approached Jesus and knelt before him.
tikko mere mat keken pe tammo pi gi mo mukene 	spends his time in drinking only and about nothing else 
angooyi nyong 	I have beaten you for no reason 
taa lawotti i tuko me teneci 	defeat your friend in tennis 
obollo woko 	he threw away or he threw out 
Ka ce onoŋo wuŋeyo tyen lok man ni, ‘Amito kica, pe lee me gitum’, onoŋo myero pe wuŋol kop olo jo ma pe ki bal. 	I tell you that something greater than the temple is here.
Yecu odaŋŋe ki dwan matek, owaco ni, “Aba, amiyo cwinya i ciŋi!” Ka owaco lok man, ci oto. 	Jesus called out with a loud voice, “Father, into your hands I commit my spirit.” When he had said this, he breathed his last.
lacaro noggo bedo boma tek mada pi mutoka madowong ma genno dano wot ata 	a villager bails it very difficult to stay in the town because of too many cars which I a event people from walking freely
man dong bic ma okatto kakare woko, wubiyo lemun ma nonggo wa del komme bene okatto iye 	this is too much squeezing, you squeezed the lemon until some part of of the skin came in the juice 
bulle twerro ngoone  	the drum can be beaten,in other words the drum can be played
tiyo kello pekko 	getting old brings problems 
Ka ma lonyowu tye iye cwinywu bene bedo iye. 	But store up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where moths and vermin do not destroy, and where thieves do not break in and steal.
ni Kricito ma Lubaŋa oyero, myero onen can, dok ni en bikwoŋo cer ki i kin jo muto wek otit bot rokwa ki bot Lurok bene pi ceŋ ma biryeny menyogi.” 	that the Messiah would suffer and, as the first to rise from the dead, would bring the message of light to his own people and to the Gentiles.”
opego ma i lum yer komgi dok dwog mada katto matye i paco 	wild pigs have long hair than those which are at home
Pien Wod pa dano cito gire kit macalo yam giciko	The Son of Man will go as it has been decreed
Dano acel acel ma ye ni Yecu en Kricito ma Lubaŋa oyero, dano-nu latin pa Lubaŋa, dok dano mo ma maro ŋat ma onywalo latin, maro latinne bene. 	Everyone who believes that Jesus is the Christ is born of God, and everyone who loves the father loves his child as well.
lokke twerro rocce 	the case can be spoiled 
Bot Temceo latinna ma amaro: Lubaŋa Won ki Kricito Yecu Rwotwa omini gum, kica ki kuc. 	Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus by the will of God, in keeping with the promise of life that is in Christ Jesus,
Ka lupwonnye guwinyo man, guryebbe piny, lworo omakogi matek. 	Listen to him!”
oteerro motte me pwoc i kanica pi katto penynye maber 	he took a gift to the church as thanksgiving for passing very well his examinations
Yecu odok iye ni, “Yam giora bot jo Icrael keken, pien gitye calo romi murwenyo.” 	Leaving that place, Jesus withdrew to the region of Tyre and Sidon.
Lokdgi obedo calo lok miŋo ki bot lukwena, pe guye lokgi. [ 	It was Mary Magdalene, Joanna, Mary the mother of James, and the others with them who told this to the apostles.
pol tye ka yugge nyo pinynye tye ka yugge 	the cloud is gathering up, that is, increasing 
tunggi tye Kitgum 	their home is in Kitgum 
Lujudaya gupennye kekengi ni, “Dano man mito cito kwene, ma wan pe wabinoŋe-ni? En mito cito bot jo mewa muket ata i kin jo Grik, ka pwonyo jo Grik? 	Jesus said, “I am with you for only a short time, and then I am going to the one who sent me.
Rwot tye acel, niye acel, batija acel,	There is one body and one Spirit, just as you were called to one hope when you were called;
Pien pe tye gin mo ma loyo Lubaŋa.” 	For no word from God will ever fail.”
Wupo pi jo ma tye i mabuc calo wutye kacel kwedgi i mabuc kunnu. Wupo bene pi jo ma gitimogi ki tim marac, kit macalo wun bene wutye i kom. 	Continue to remember those in prison as if you were together with them in prison, and those who are mistreated as if you yourselves were suffering.
Akelo tin opoor woko 	Akelo ran away to her boyfriend today
Ŋat acel i kingi ma nyiŋe Agabo ocuŋ ci otito lok pi Cwiny Maleŋ ma onyutte lok ma i anyim, ni waŋ mo kec bipoto i lobo ducu	One of them, named Agabus, stood up and through the Spirit predicted that a severe famine would spread over the entire Roman world
Dok mon ma giyac gibineno can i kare meno, ki mon ma gidoto litino bene! 	How dreadful it will be in those days for pregnant women and nursing mothers!
amitto canduk me nyonyo 	I want a metal box
Pe in aye Laejipt ma yam otubo dano ci otero lunek alip aŋwen woko i tim?” 	“Aren’t you the Egyptian who started a revolt and led four thousand terrorists out into the wilderness some time ago?”
wanynyo cammo rec 	to yearn eating fish
Wutiŋ peko pa luwotwu, meno aye bimiyo wucobo cik pa Kricito. 	There is neither Jew nor Gentile, neither slave nor free, nor is there male and female, for you are all one in Christ Jesus.
Romina winyo dwana, an aŋeyogi, gin luba. 	but you do not believe because you are not my sheep.
ento ka noŋone oloye woko, ci wacci, ‘Abidok gira i oda ka ma yam aa ki iye-ni.’ 	Then it says, ‘I will return to the house I left.’
[“Kit gin macalo man pe twero katti woko, kono ki lega ki ri kec keken.”] 	Then the disciples came to Jesus in private and asked, “Why couldn’t we drive it out?”
cwallo kwena boti 	to send you a message 
tye ka petto kolo me beddo ki welo 	she is spreading the papyrus mat for the visitors to sit on
In lagoba, koŋ ikwoŋ kwanyo dul yat ma tye i waŋi-ni woko, ci miyo doŋ ineno piny maber me kwanyo cuŋ kal ma tye i waŋ omeru ca. 	How can you say to your brother, ‘Let me take the speck out of your eye,’ when all the time there is a plank in your own eye?
lacoo pi beddo ka jul keken, omiyo dakone oringgo woko ki botte 	moodiness of the husband all the time, made the wife to run away from him
man jamigi 	these are their goods
Ento Yecu odokke iye ni, “Luba, wek jo muto guyik jo muto wadigi.” 	Another disciple said to him, “Lord, first let me go and bury my father.”
nyayo lok pe ber 	to spread the matter is not good
pe winynyo lok maber ma gipwonynye kwede	does not understand what he is being taught 
Iwok miyo yot kom 	bathing makes the body healthy 
cwee agulo maber me acatta 	make a very fine pot for sale 
ladep twerro rwicce ki lwet cing 	the flea can be crushed with finger nails
pang wiye woko 	turn him away 
tic en aye gin maber ki dano ducu 	work is something which is good for everybody 
pe imoor wanggi i komma, an pe ma aballo 	don't look at me with suspicion, I am not the one who spoilt it
pe tye ki cwiny maber 	he is bad
monygi odiko con nonggo pud gubutto 	attack them in the early morning while they are still sleeping 
tic man me kuro lim kama giterro iye rac mada, luticce mitto cukku cwiny mada 	the work of protecting money, when it is being carried from one place to another place, is very dangerous, the workers need much encouragement and urging
jo pa oca wacci pud odong dyel acel me luk 	my wife's people said that there is still one goat which I should pay for taking her before marriage
ruyo citto ka coo 	to hurry to go to be married
Pe otwero tiyo tic matego kunnu, ento oketo ciŋe i kom lutwo mogo, ocaŋogi. 	He could not do any miracles there, except lay his hands on a few sick people and heal them.
ci gudaŋŋe matek ka gunene tye ka waŋ kun yito duny, kun giwacci, “Gaŋ mene ma onoŋo yam rom ki gaŋ man madit-ti?” 	When they see the smoke of her burning, they will exclaim, ‘Was there ever a city like this great city?’
tic me tinggo ter ma pek miyo ikom nyotte woko 	the work of carrying heavy loads weakens the body
dako wotto kun yaarre pien tye ki wodde 	the woman walks with prkie because she has a son
Pi meno, cik leŋ, ki gin ma giciko bene leŋ, tye atir, dok ber bene. 	For sin, seizing the opportunity afforded by the commandment, deceived me, and through the commandment put me to death.
Ka gutyeko a woko ki i yeya, ci lwak guŋeyo Yecu oyotoyot. 	As soon as they got out of the boat, people recognized Jesus.
Pi meno dano ma kwoŋo kwoŋ ki keno tyer, kwoŋo bene ki jami ducu ma tye i wi keno tyer. 	You blind men! Which is greater: the gift, or the altar that makes the gift sacred?
tuno yango or tuno lut 	a breast which has already drooped, a long suspended or pendulous breast
En odok iye botgi ni, “Wun gimiyo botwu mot me ŋeyo muŋ me ker me polo, ento jo maca pe gimiyo botgi. 	He replied, “Because the knowledge of the secrets of the kingdom of heaven has been given to you, but not to them.
wang otyeno 	in the evening 
winyo beddo ni puru puru ka cammo kal 	the birds are flying all around eating millet
en lwoddo dyel nino ducu kama pe ber me cam 	he always fastens the goat not in a good place for grazing
Ka wumito ber bot dano ma timowu ber, pwoc aŋo ma wubilimo iye? Pien lubalo bene gimito kit meno. 	And if you do good to those who are good to you, what credit is that to you? Even sinners do that.
Ento Petero owacce ni, “Piŋo wun aryo ducu wuribbe ka bwolo Cwiny pa Rwot? Nen, tyen jo muyiko cwari ka tye i doggola, in bene gibiteri woko.” 	Peter said to her, “How could you conspire to test the Spirit of the Lord? Listen! The feet of the men who buried your husband are at the door, and they will carry you out also.”
Pien kit gin mo ducu maber, ki mot ducu mabeco twatwal ma gimiyowa, a ki malo, a ki bot Lubaŋa Won bino piny, ma en aye won gin ducu ma ryeny i polo, ma pe tye ki alokaloka mo, dok tipo mo ma nyuto lokkene bene pe. 	Every good and perfect gift is from above, coming down from the Father of the heavenly lights, who does not change like shifting shadows.
bagge pe gin maber ma ngatti mo pe myerro obed kwedde 	to be confused is not good, which no one should have it
jalle nenno dano marac macallo lanek  	the fellow looks at people viciously like a muderer
gin wicca tye kwene? 	where is my hat?
Kit meno cik aye obedo lagwokwa ma myero olowa nio ka Kricito obino, ka doŋ gicako kwanowa ni kitwa atir pi niye. 	Before the coming of this faith, we were held in custody under the law, locked up until the faith that was to come would be revealed.
jooni gimeer mada 	they are very friendly 
ribbo cam ki ominne 	shares the food with his brother or sharing the food with his brother
Pien wudiyo cwinywu ki yomcwiny i kom jo ma lumiŋ, kun wun jo maryek. 	Since many are boasting in the way the world does, I too will boast.
Ka dok oloko ni, “An a ene, doŋ abino ka cobo mitini.” Ojwayo mukwoŋone-ni woko wek omi ekel me aryone. 	Then he said, “Here I am, I have come to do your will.” He sets aside the first to establish the second.
taa i tuko me teneci 	win in the game of tennis
wii mon 	leader of women
pe konynyo me jwatto Latin ma oballo bal myerro gipwony apwonynya wek pe obal dok aye 	it is of no use striking a child who has done something wrong with a stick, he should be taught against doing such bad things again
cit wunu ka jubbo kal matye i dyekal wuony i aduku ka wek dong wuony i dero 	go to scoop with your fingers the millet on the compounds, and pour it on the basket so that you may pour it into the granary
tye ka luggu alugga pien opotto penynye me donynyo i kolej 	he is very much depressed because he failed in his examination for entrance to the college
cit ka lac i coron  	go to pass urine in the lavatory
kot rye ka cweer ni waca waca 	the rain is drizzling
Waraga man oa ki bot Paulo ma lakwena pa Kricito Yecu pi mit pa Lubaŋa, ma lubo cikkene me miyowa kwo ma tye i Kricito Yecu. 	Greet Priscilla and Aquila and the household of Onesiphorus.
tikko yoo acel keken 	following only one way
gitye ka jiyo anyogi ma otwoo wek gimwoddi 	they are partially cooking the dried maize so that it may be eaten 
i luduku col	inside the barrel of the gun is dard
danone dok lajogge twatwal	the man always delays
lak lyecci bocco mada, dok giyubbogi me beddo jami mapol mada me deyo, omiyo dano gimitti ginek lyecci wek gicat lakgi 	elephant tusks are very long, they are made into many ornamental things, that is why people want to kill the elephants so that they may sell the tusks
tiki tiki ni tye kwene me donynyo me nenno tuko? 	where is your entrance ticket to watch the play?
ginywalle i dwe me Jun nino apar 	he was born on the tenth of June
en lagoga mada  	he is a great comedian
acomme maber mada	I diluted it very well
nyaani in icitto kwene? 	where are you going? 
Gin aryo ducu yam kitgi atir i nyim Lubaŋa, kun gilubo cik pa Rwot ducu laboŋo bal. 	Both of them were righteous in the sight of God, observing all the Lord’s commands and decrees blamelessly.
En owaco botgi ni, “Piŋo wubedo ki lworo, wun jo ma niyewu nok?” Ci oa woko ojuko yamo ki nam, nam ocako liŋ mot. 	The disciples went and woke him, saying, “Lord, save us! We’re going to drown!”
kongo anyogi yenynyo maber mada 	fermentation of the maize is very good
Ka nino okato manok, kabaka Agripa ki Bernike guo i Cecaria ka jolo Festo. 	A few days later King Agrippa and Bernice arrived at Caesarea to pay their respects to Festus.
luut ginonggo i kulo me Africa ma kado pe lye 	the eel is found in Africas' fresh water
Nino ducu onoŋo Yecu pwonyo i ot pa Lubaŋa dyeceŋ, ento dyewor woto buto i wi got ma gilwoŋo got Jeituni. 	Each day Jesus was teaching at the temple, and each evening he went out to spend the night on the hill called the Mount of Olives,
gweno opong i ot gi ma beddi ni jogo-jogo 	the chicken are full in their house in great number making all sorts of noises
Lacen aneno cen maraco adek ma gubedo calo ogwal ma okatti ki i doŋ min kulu, ki i dog lee, ki i dog lanebi ma lagoba, 	Then I saw three impure spirits that looked like frogs; they came out of the mouth of the dragon, out of the mouth of the beast and out of the mouth of the false prophet.
kwon ma omokko i teer agulu ma dong gitokko kwonne woko, en aye gilwong go ni odeyo 	the hard crust of kwon which is stuck on the inside of the pot is called odeyo 
Gucoko ŋide, gupoŋo aduku apar wiye aryo ki i kom mugati abic me cayiri ma lwak gucamo odoŋ. 	Another of his disciples, Andrew, Simon Peter’s brother, spoke up,
agulu ma gibeddo woko mitto aumma wek ober pe gunywal iye 	all these pots which are out should be covered to prevent mosquitoes from breeding in them 
Gutero Yecu bot ajwaka madit pa Lubaŋa, kun onoŋo ajwagi madito ki ludoŋo-gu ki lupwony-cik gucokke kacel. 	They took Jesus to the high priest, and all the chief priests, the elders and the teachers of the law came together.
ngad gutti ka wek lien 	stretch your neck up in order to see 
Pee mapek twatwal ocorre ki i polo opoto i kom dano, kun pek pa nyig pee acel acel onoŋo cok romo ratili miya acel	From the sky huge hailstones, each weighing about a hundred pounds, fell on people
Man otimme i komgi calo lok ma carolok me ada oloko ni, “Gwok lokke dok ka naŋo ŋokke,” ki dok ni, “Opego ma gilwoko kome, lokke dok ka nywanne i coto.”	Of them the proverbs are true: “A dog returns to its vomit,” and, “A sow that is washed returns to her wallowing in the mud.”
tye yat ma ginonggo lye rote ma kwar 	there is a tree from which red dye is found 
nyelo riine i kom lee mo matek ka mitto nekkone 	python coils itself very tightly round the animal when it wants to kill it
Kikopo me gum ma walego iye gum, pe waribbe iye i remo pa Kricito? 	Is not the cup of thanksgiving for which we give thanks a participation in the blood of Christ? And is not the bread that we break a participation in the body of Christ?
Wun yam pe wuwinyo dwane, pe wuneno wa calle	And the Father who sent me has himself testified concerning me
I kare ma gikane woko i dog kulu, ci nya pa Parao oloke obedo latinne, opite macalo wode kikome. 	When he was placed outside, Pharaoh’s daughter took him and brought him up as her own son.
Jo mukene gua malo, ci gukelo lok goba i kome ni, 	Then some stood up and gave this false testimony against him:
En mumiyo awaco lok man botwu kun acikowu i Rwot ni, pe myero pud dok wubed i kit ma Lurok gibedo kwede, i tamgi ma konnye pe.	From him the whole body, joined and held together by every supporting ligament, grows and builds itself up in love, as each part does its work.
Lacen gibineno Wod pa dano kun bino i wi pol ki tek ki deyo madit. 	At that time they will see the Son of Man coming in a cloud with power and great glory.
Lamalaika mukene doki okatti ki i ot pa Lubaŋa ma tye i polo, en bene onoŋo omako pala kac mabit. 	Another angel came out of the temple in heaven, and he too had a sharp sickle.
dano gucubbe mada kare me pyem odilo 	people stabbed one another during the football game
acuurro lok botgi ni guckke kuno me yubbo lok me kwoo keken	I told them quite frankly that all of them who have gathered there are for preparing to rob at any time
Lacen dok aneno lee mukene ka katti i ki ŋom	Then I saw a second beast, coming out of the earth
aa malo 	get up
Kit meno, dano ducu ma i kinwu ma iye pe twero cayo gin ducu ma etye kwede, pe twero bedo lapwonnyena. 	In the same way, those of you who do not give up everything you have cannot be my disciples.
Cimon Petero olubo kor Yecu, kacel ki lapwonnye meno mukene. 	Caiaphas was the one who had advised the Jewish leaders that it would be good if one man died for the people.
ngat ma lawakke twatwal beddo bene ki lurem manok 	a very proud person has very few friends 
ryekko i dyang, ryekko i dyel, ki mukene 	opening the cow's, goats and others abdomens
giwacci attii pe atwerro nywal ento kombeddi atye ki ic 	they said that I am now old and thal I cannot give birth to a child but I am now pregnant
gucitto ka yer 	they went for general election or they went to choose or select
Kit meno wun bene wubiŋeyogi i kom kitgi. 	Every tree that does not bear good fruit is cut down and thrown into the fire.
log kal man ducu matye i aduku man 	winnow all the millet in this basket
“Ka doŋ ocwalo mere ducu woko, en woto i nyimgi, romi lube, pien giŋeyo dwane. 	He calls his own sheep by name and leads them out.
labolo ojwir woko 	the banana has withered away 
Pilato owaccigi ni, “Wun kikomwu wutere, wuŋolle kop kun wulubo cikwu.” Lujudaya gudokke iye ni, “Pe giye wan wanek dano mo.” 	“If he were not a criminal,” they replied, “we would not have handed him over to you.”
ojiri woo mada ki koko i dye wor gimaarro beddo bene i ot 	the crickets make a lot of noise at night and do commonly live in the house
piir pii pong i agulu man 	fill this pot with water full to the brim 
Ci jo ma kitgi atir bidok iye bote ni, ‘Rwot, yam waneni awene ka kec neki, ci wamii cam, nyo ka orwo neki, ci wamii pii imato? 	“Then the righteous will answer him, ‘Lord, when did we see you hungry and feed you, or thirsty and give you something to drink?
wang ridi 	narrow door or passage or entrance 
Wupwo, cwinywu obed yom atika, pien bakacic ma gibimiyowu me pwoc dit, tye i polo, pien lunebi ma yam gukwoŋo nyimwu dano guketo ayelayela i komgi kit meno.” 	Rejoice and be glad, because great is your reward in heaven, for in the same way they persecuted the prophets who were before you.
ringone moone pe 	the meat has no fat in it 
okok mada pi too pa ominne 	he cried very much about the death of his brother 
Bed ki yomcwiny, in polo, ki wun bene ma wubedo iye! Ento wun lobo ki nam, wubineno can malit atika, pien Ladot doŋ olor obino woko piny botwu ma tye ki akemo madwoŋ, pien ŋeyo ni karene tye manok!” 	Therefore rejoice, you heavens and you who dwell in them! But woe to the earth and the sea, because the devil has gone down to you! He is filled with fury, because he knows that his time is short.”
Kit macalo yam gicoyo ni, “Gibedo ka nekowa dyeceŋ jwi piri, gikwanowa macalo romi me aneka.” 	Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Shall trouble or hardship or persecution or famine or nakedness or danger or sword?
Gin dok guwo ni, “Pe en, ento Baraba.” Baraba kono ceŋ layak.	“Is that your own idea,” Jesus asked, “or did others talk to you about me?”
gwed woko cente ma omiyo i cinggeni 	remove with force the cents which he has in his tightly closed fingers
kotte tye ka cweer ki pee  	it is raining with hailstones
ngat ma obuccu gweno man pe ngeyo buc maber 	the one who has plucked this chicken does not know how to pluck 
Waŋe ryeny calo mac, dok onoŋo oruko lalukana mapol me loc i wiye	His eyes are like blazing fire, and on his head are many crowns
bao ne mitto tweny ka wek gicwer me doggola 	the wood plank needs to be straightened in order to be planed for the door
Waraga man oa ki bot ladit. Bot dako ma giyero ki litinone ma amaro i ada, pe an keken ento kadi wa jo ducu ma giŋeyo lok me ada, 	Anyone who does wrong will be repaid for their wrongs, and there is no favoritism.
piny cwir 	rainy season 
acayo mada lok ma Okwera olokko laworro	I despised very much what Okwera said yesterday
Dano pyerabiro-nu gudwogo cen ki yomcwiny, kun giwaco ni, “Rwot, wa cen maraco bene guwinyo cikwa pi nyiŋi!” 	The seventy-two returned with joy and said, “Lord, even the demons submit to us in your name.”
gucitto ka doyo 	they went to weed
ma gucako nia wa i kom batija pa Jon nio wa onyoo ma doŋ gitiŋe kwede malo ki i kinwa	beginning from John’s baptism to the time when Jesus was taken up from us
I kare ma doŋ gubea woko ki i Jeriko, lwak madwoŋ gulubo kore. 	As Jesus and his disciples were leaving Jericho, a large crowd followed him.
Jo mukene guye lok ma otitoni ento jo mukene gukwero ye. 	Some were convinced by what he said, but others would not believe.
beddo ki lakwaarro ber mada pien konynyi 	to have a granddaughter is very good because she helps you
lalur lakke tek mada cammo cogo ducu macallo ringo mape winynyo tekke 	a hyena has very strong teeth, eats bones like meat and does not feel their hardness 
Ŋat acel i kin lupwony-cik ogamo doge ni, “Lapwony, ka iwaco kit man nyuto ni iyeto wa wan bene.” 	Jesus replied, “And you experts in the law, woe to you, because you load people down with burdens they can hardly carry, and you yourselves will not lift one finger to help them.
bal ticce woko 	spoil or ruin his work
ummo kom ki bongo	to cover the body with cloth
pii me lwok tye kwene? 	where is the water for bathing? 
jo mukene ni, Elia aye doŋ onen, jo mukene ni, ŋat acel i kin lunebi macon aye ocer. 	others that Elijah had appeared, and still others that one of the prophets of long ago had come back to life.
wek cam cwarri	stop being a parasite like bedbugs
lapit latin 	one bringing up an orphan
dano maarro mwoddo anyogi abulla mada	people like eating grilled maize very much
Ci gumake, guneke woko, gubole woko wa i ŋe poto olok. 	So they took him and killed him, and threw him out of the vineyard.
piir me kwoo  	planning to steal
owitto rec ki goli 	he drew the fish on the hook with a jerk
abembem keken gin aye gubeddo i kom	only the very important people sat on the chairs
miya ma tidi mo 	give me a little bit of it
Wubed kun wulubo yo me mar, macalo Kricito ceŋ omarowa, ci omine kene piwa wek ebed macalo gitum ma ŋwece kur ma gityero bot Lubaŋa. 	Follow God’s example, therefore, as dearly loved children
werro wic macol 	dyeing the hair black
kadi kwanyo gin mogo, ento myero gunyut ni gin jo ma genne maber twatwal, wek i gin ducu gumi pwony pa Lubaŋa Lalarwa onen ma mwonya. 	Teach slaves to be subject to their masters in everything, to try to please them, not to talk back to them,
yat ka opotto ogoyo tyen latin ci nyocco cogo tyenne woko 	if a tree fell and struck a child's leg, it will a cause  bend his leg bones
kiyata iye obedo waca waca 	the potatoes are bad because they are spongy and watery drizzling 
lee ne obinno ki tung beam ci dong cubbone oloya woko  	the animal came from the left side, therefore I was unable to spear
deene ki tung tyeni	hanging oneself by the leg
Oderone me pyeto bel tye i ciŋe, en biyubo larone woko maber, ci coko kalle dilo i dero, ento cuŋe en biwaŋo woko ki mac ma pe to.” 	The ax is already at the root of the trees, and every tree that does not produce good fruit will be cut down and thrown into the fire.
Pi meno, wukwe cwinyu kekenwu ki lok magi.	Therefore encourage one another with these words.
bongo ka gilwokko teretere wekko tii oyot oyot 	when the cloth is washed frequently, it gets old quickly
Ka Lurok ma gipe ki cik gitiyo gin ma cik mito pi kitgi ma ginywalogi kwede, meno noŋo doŋ gin kikomgi gudoko wegi cik, kadi bed cik pa Moses pe botgi. 	For God does not show favoritism.
pongo en aye lak lyec ma gitonggo doko ogul ma girukko i bad macallo ogul, ento gilwonggo ni pongo pe ogul 	pongo is an ivory which has been cut into a ring that is normally worn round the arm as armlet
Latic pa Rwot myero obed ŋat ma pe da atata, myero obed ŋat ma lakica bot dano ducu, lapwony ma ladiro, ŋat ma diyo cwinye, 	Flee the evil desires of youth and pursue righteousness, faith, love and peace, along with those who call on the Lord out of a pure heart.
Lubaŋa ma gipwoyo, en acel keken aye Won Twer, Kabaka pa luker ducu, Rwot pa rwodi, en binyuto man ka kare kikome doŋ oromo. 	to keep this command without spot or blame until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ,
opego gitye ka genne i daba 	the pigs are rolling in the mud
can lwak buk man ducu i rek kama giketto iye buk 	pile all these books on the shelves in the libray 
ladwog Labeca icitto kwene?  	where are you going Mr Labeca?
wek ŋat acel i kin jo man gikwan kwedwa me bedo lacaden me cerre.” 	For one of these must become a witness with us of his resurrection.”
Ento anyira ma lumiŋŋu gulego anyira ma luryeko-ni, ni, ‘Wumiwa moowu-ni mogo do, pien mac tarawa mito to woko.’ 	The foolish ones said to the wise, ‘Give us some of your oil; our lamps are going out.’
yatte bor ma yew ni nga nanga ka gitinggo i wile 	the pole is very tall that it swings up and down when carried on the head
ladyel ma lapele tur bad dero	a kid which is too lively breaks its bones on the granary
gunno latinni mada 	they over worked the child very much
tye ka yenggo ajaa  	is shaking the rattle to call the spirit to relieve the person who is possessed by it
En bedo caden i kom gin ma oneno ki i kom gin ma owinyo, ento pe tye ŋat mo ma ye lok ma en otito. 	He must become greater; I must become less.”
Tito lawota dok latic wadiwa piwu, ki utmegiwa mukene-gu, gin luor pa jo ducu ma guye Kricito, gin bene aye jo ma kelo deyo bot Kricito. 	In addition, we are sending with them our brother who has often proved to us in many ways that he is zealous, and now even more so because of his great confidence in you.
Petero ocako wacce ni, “Ce wan kono ma waweko jamiwa ducu, ci walubi-ni?” 	Then Peter spoke up, “We have left everything to follow you!”
pworra mo manok 	give me some 
lagwee komgi obeddo mulo-mulo 	the water-hen or water rail runs very fast and cannot be caught by only chasing it
Pien dano ducu ma timo gin marac dag ceŋ, pe bino i ceŋ, wek timme pe onen ka maleŋ. 	This is the verdict: Light has come into the world, but people loved darkness instead of light because their deeds were evil.
Caina marro cammo adam wii dyang	the Chinese like very much to eat ox brains
Ento latim lawote marac-ci ocwale cen kun wacci, ‘Aŋa ma oketo in me bedo laŋolkop ki lalowa? 	“But the man who was mistreating the other pushed Moses aside and said, ‘Who made you ruler and judge over us?
lokke cwiiyo cwinynye mada 	he is very much annoyed about the matter
Odiko ka gitye ka wot i yo meno, guneno oduro otal nia wa i lwite. 	In the morning, as they went along, they saw the fig tree withered from the roots.
Cwiny Maleŋ yam oyuto tamma woko i nino pa Rwot, ka doŋ cut awinyo dwan maloŋo yo tuŋ i ŋeya ma winnye calo koko tum ma gikuto 	On the Lord’s Day I was in the Spirit, and I heard behind me a loud voice like a trumpet,
Litino adii ma gucito ka Jinno ber tukko odilo? 	how many children went to play football? 
Kabaka bidok iye botgi ni, ‘Ada awaco botwu ni gin ma wutimo bot dano acel i kin utmegina magi matino, meno wutimo bota.’ 	“The King will reply, ‘Truly I tell you, whatever you did for one of the least of these brothers and sisters of mine, you did for me.’
kun giwacci, “Wuwac bot lwak ni, ‘Lupwonnyene gubino ki dyewor ci gukwalo kome i kare ma onoŋo wanino woko.’ 	When the chief priests had met with the elders and devised a plan, they gave the soldiers a large sum of money,
mur pii ma tye i tagi me lyetto piini 	heat the water in the water heater 
Jo ma guneno lok man gutito botgi kit ma dano meno ma yam tye ki cen ocaŋ kwede. 	Those who had seen it told the people how the demon-possessed man had been cured.
Ento atye ki lworo ni, kit macalo twol yam obwolo Kawa ki ryekone, wun bene dano bibalo tamwu woko, ma miyo pe doŋ wubimaro Kricito ki cwinywu ducu ki mar maleŋ. 	I promised you to one husband, to Christ, so that I might present you as a pure virgin to him.
gwok omakko obaa ma ononggo okwallo palaa 	the dog caught the hamster which had stolen the knife
en mitto willo tunga labolo aryo 	he wants to buy two hands of bananas
twoo piny owekko pe dong wanoggo pot dek mo me acamma 	dryness of the weather has made it Impossible to get any vegetables for eating
ocitto ka madde 	he went to have his ulcer cleaned or swabbed with hot water 
lab gweng woko ki i nyim ma girubbo ki pii  	remove the stone from the simsim mixed with water
gurayo yen madwon me teddo 	they collected plenty of firewood for cooking
pii me lwok tye kwene? 	where is the water for washing? 
pien gitiko ka cam ki mat ki kit lwok mapatpat. Magi ducu gubedo cik ma nen ki woko me kom ma tye ka tic nio wa i kare ma Lubaŋa biloko jami ducu bedo manyen. 	They are only a matter of food and drink and various ceremonial washings—external regulations applying until the time of the new order.
wotto i toyo jwijwi kello ayila i kom tyen 	walking frequently in the dew causes itching of the skin of the legs
Lupwonnyene guwaco ni, “Nen, koni iloko ka maleŋ, pe i carolok. 	No, the Father himself loves you because you have loved me and have believed that I came from God.
wallo lum ki i poto	to gather grass from the field 
Kricito doŋ otyeko mayo jami lweny woko ki bot jogi ma gin luloc ki wegi twer, kun nyutte ka maleŋ i kom yatariya ni doŋ eloyogi. 	having canceled the charge of our legal indebtedness, which stood against us and condemned us; he has taken it away, nailing it to the cross.
Petero owacce ni, “Rwot, doŋ ayubbe me cito kwedi i mabuc ki i to.” 	But he replied, “Lord, I am ready to go with you to prison and to death.”
mac tye ka gunynye i wii cere caa 	the fire is flaming fiercely on the hill over there
Bal onoŋo tye i lobo con ma peya gimiyo cik, ento ka ma cik pe iye, bal bene pe gikwano i wi ŋat mo. 	Therefore, just as sin entered the world through one man, and death through sin, and in this way death came to all people, because all sinned—
bil Wino ma gubeddo piny caa wek gunin woko ka itye ki twer meno 	hypnotize those children who are seated there to sleep if you have the power to do so
temmo cug ki tyenne acel 	trying or attempting to stand on one leg 
Iwakke pi cik, ento ituro cik kun icayo Lubaŋa? 	You who say that people should not commit adultery, do you commit adultery? You who abhor idols, do you rob temples?
Waraga man oa ki bot ladit. Bot larema Gayo ma amaro i ada. 	Ask the Lord of the harvest, therefore, to send out workers into his harvest field.”
Tam gin ma aloko, pien Rwot bimiyo iniaŋ i jami ducu. 	The hardworking farmer should be the first to receive a share of the crops.
lacoone kit purre pe nianggo dano pien yurru ayurra 	it is difficult to understand how the man cultivates because he does it roughly 
Oderone tye i ciŋe me pyeto bel ducu ma i larone, en bidilo belle i dero, ento cuŋe en biwaŋo woko ki mac ma pe to.” 	His winnowing fork is in his hand to clear his threshing floor and to gather the wheat into his barn, but he will burn up the chaff with unquenchable fire.”
Pien onoŋo ocike ni, “A woko ki i kom dano man, in cen marac.” 	For Jesus had said to him, “Come out of this man, you impure spirit!”
Pe tye ŋat mo ma kwero Wod ma dok tye gin ki Won. Dano ma oye Wod, noŋo tye ki Won bene. 	No one who denies the Son has the Father; whoever acknowledges the Son has the Father also.
Acano koma, kun bene aloye calo opiina, wek ka doŋ atyeko tito lok bot jo mukene, pe abed ŋat ma pe gipwoyo.	No, I strike a blow to my body and make it my slave so that after I have preached to others, I myself will not be disqualified for the prize.
dyang ma ringone yom dok maber mada me acamma inenno ki boro matye i kom cinne 	a cattle with a good and soft 
Lamalaika mukwoŋo ocito oonyo gin ma i i atabone woko i lobo. Ci two bur maraco ma toko kom dano atoka omako jo ma poyo pa lee ca tye i komgi ma giworo calle bene-ni. 	The first angel went and poured out his bowl on the land, and ugly, festering sores broke out on the people who had the mark of the beast and worshiped its image.
ka iketto moc me kal meeri i dye kal myerro then ni iryammo gweno woko iye 	if you have put your millet to dry make sure that you chase away the chicken from it
nyed lok botgi kuno ento pe ki botwa kany 	talk there to them arrogantly but not to us here
Yecu dok odonyo i kacokke, ma onoŋo tye iye dano mo ma bade otal. 	Another time Jesus went into the synagogue, and a man with a shriveled hand was there.
tye myel pa Acoli mapol mada macallo magi: 	there are many types of Acholi dances 
lwokko kom dano	taking or giving an offering to the spirit in order to make it get out 
yang con awobe ki anyira gibeddo ka doyo yer nyaargi adoya 	long time ago the boys and the girls used to pluck their pubic hair
Ka apoto piny, awinyo dwan ma wacca ni, ‘Caulo, Caulo, piŋo itye ka yela?’ 	I fell to the ground and heard a voice say to me, ‘Saul! Saul! Why do you persecute me?’
otinggo ringo ni yany ocitto kwedde kuno 	he carried a big portion ot meat and went with it there
rid latin bao mo i kin doggola ki kom ot ci doggola yabbe 	push hard a piece of wood between the door and the wall and the door will open
kit macalo atye kunnu-ni doŋ atyeko ŋolo kop woko i kom dano meno ma doŋ otimo tim marac-ci. 	As one who is present with you in this way, I have already passed judgment in the name of our Lord Jesus on the one who has been doing this.
lalelee omukko but ot woko	torrent rain has washed away the side of the hut
bor pa bongone twerro pimme 	the length of the cloth can be measured
wek anyut ka maleŋ i kit ma myero. 	And pray for us, too, that God may open a door for our message, so that we may proclaim the mystery of Christ, for which I am in chains.
belle twerro loune 	the corn can be winnowed
agii en aye gin marac mada, pien dano tweerro goyo jami ne ducu	gambling or betting is a very bad thing because a strong heart
Jo mogo i kingi omito make, ento pe tye ŋat mo ma oketo ciŋe i kome. 	Thus the people were divided because of Jesus.
an tin apurro nio wa otyeno 	today I cultivated up to the evening
cati arkii dok lyet ka piny bene lyet 	the goat can be sold quickly 
ce cee ki wun bene, wubinno ka cunna! 	watch the kite from snatching the chick
doggolane lapiny, mitto lugge piny manok ka wek ikat 	the door is low, it needs bending a little in order to pass through
Ka kare me nywal pa Elicabet doŋ oromo, ci onywalo latin laco. 	When it was time for Elizabeth to have her baby, she gave birth to a son.
Pien jo ma gin lupyem tye pol, jo ma loko lok ma tere pe, ki jo ma bwolo dano, makatone dul pa jo ma mito ni, jo muye Kricito myero koŋ gulirre. 	He must hold firmly to the trustworthy message as it has been taught, so that he can encourage others by sound doctrine and refute those who oppose it.
Jon en aye ngat acel i kom yaa lwakwa ma wakwanno kwedgi Budo 	John is one of our contemporary with whom we studied at Budo
Lacen en doŋ biwaco bot jo ma tye yo tuŋ ciŋe ma lacam ni, ‘Wun jo ma giceno, wua woko ki i nyima, wudony i mac ma pe to ma giyubo pi Catan ki lumalaikane. 	“Then he will say to those on his left, ‘Depart from me, you who are cursed, into the eternal fire prepared for the devil and his angels.
Man omiyo lok ma yam lanebi Jeremia oloko ocobbe kakare ni, 	Then what was said through the prophet Jeremiah was fulfilled:
tirro dano i tyeng 	making people stand in a straight line
labwor obinno omakko dyang wa i akul 	the lion came and caught one cattle from the pen
kun waniaŋ ni, cik pe giketo pi jo ma kitgi atir, ento giketo pi lutur-cik ki pi jo ma pe ki winy, pi jo ma pe lworo Lubaŋa ki pi lubalo, pi jo ma pe gileŋ, jo ma pe keto cwinygi i kom Lubaŋa, pi jo ma neko wongi ki jo ma neko megigi, pi lunek dano mukene, 	We know that the law is good if one uses it properly.
Ka gitye ka wot i yo, ci Yecu odonyo i gaŋ mo, ci dako mo ma nyiŋe Marita ojole i ode. 	As Jesus and his disciples were on their way, he came to a village where a woman named Martha opened her home to him.
jang yat ma dyak twerro conynye 	a wet twig of a tree can be bent 
ringo ma okwok en aye kong gijiyo ka lacen dong gitallo	bad meat is the one that is first partially cooked and then later it is smoked
Man en gin mumiyo pe gitwero ye, pien Icaya dok owaco ni, 	This was to fulfill the word of Isaiah the prophet: “Lord, who has believed our message and to whom has the arm of the Lord been revealed?”
en bene myero obin	he should also come 
Ento in ka imiyo kony bot lucan, pe iwekciŋi ma lacam oŋe gin ma ciŋi ma lacuc timo, 	So they went and made the tomb secure by putting a seal on the stone and posting the guard.
jami myerro pe giwekko radde ata i dye ot 	things should not be left scattered all over the floor 
odongo ka wii wonne 	he grew up to his father's height
Koŋ agonnyi tyen lok me muŋ me lakalatwe abiro ma ineno i ciŋa tuŋ lacuc, ki okar-mac abiro me jabu. Lakalatwe abiro gin aye lumalaika pa lwak muye Kricito ma gitye i kabedo abiro mapatpat, doŋ okar-mac abiro-ni gin aye lwak muye Kricito ma gitye i kabedo abiro mapatpat.”	The mystery of the seven stars that you saw in my right hand and of the seven golden lampstands is this: The seven stars are the angels of the seven churches, and the seven lampstands are the seven churches.
ento dano ma odobo Wod pa dano-ni bineno can! Kono nene obedo ber ka dano-nu pe ginywalo.” 	But woe to that man who betrays the Son of Man! It would be better for him if he had not been born.”
oryebbe piny ka tyen Yecu, kun pwoye. En onoŋo Lacamaria. 	He threw himself at Jesus’ feet and thanked him—and he was a Samaritan.
Gucito oyotoyot, gunoŋo Maliam ki Yucepu, ki latin lakere ma gipyelo i weer pa dyaŋ. 	So they hurried off and found Mary and Joseph, and the baby, who was lying in the manger.
dano ka otimmo bal myerro otuc balle kama leg 	if a man has committed sin, he should openly confess it
gangge tye cok cok kany 	his home is very near here 
Jo magi onoŋo yam tamgi tye acel, ci gumiyo twerogi ki ditogi woko bot lee ca. 	They have one purpose and will give their power and authority to the beast.
yenynye me nonggo kama gikanno iye luduko oollo dano mada 	to look for where the gun was hidden tired people completely
gwenone yot 	the chicken is light
lapwopwo gibeddi puru puru i kom ature 	the butterflies are flying all around the flowers
dano ducu nia kitgi raccu gitweyogi i buc 	all bad people are jailed in the prison
Pi meno, lurema, kit ma doŋ onoŋo wuŋeyo man con, wugwokke pe wuwek jo ma pe giworo cik mo gubwolwu, dok pe guŋakwu woko i tamwu, miyo wupoto woko ki ka ma wucuŋ iye matek. 	Therefore, dear friends, since you have been forewarned, be on your guard so that you may not be carried away by the error of the lawless and fall from your secure position.
Ka en tye ka ito i yeya, ci dano ma yam tye ki cen maraco obako doge bot Yecu ni myero ebed bote. 	As Jesus was getting into the boat, the man who had been demon-possessed begged to go with him.
lung nying lamola ma gireggo wek gited gicam 	make balls, dumpling of ground lamola seeds so that it may be cooked for eating
Ento kombeddi abinyuto botwu ni Wod pa dano tye ki twero me weko bal i wi lobo.” Ci cut owaco bot latwo akweya kom ni, 	But I want you to know that the Son of Man has authority on earth to forgive sins.” So he said to the man,
nyako ma poor woko ki i ganggi ki lacoo, noggo ganggi pe tye maber 	a girl who elopes from her home, it meams that her home is not good
dano abic mitte me citto ka jallow wii lum matye ibaar odilo 	five people are required to go to cut the top of the grass in the football field
akurogi, pe tye mo ma orwenyo ki i kingi, kono dano ma myero orweny, wek ginacoya ocobbe kakare. 	While I was with them, I protected them and kept them safe by that name you gave me
Lubaŋa pe olwoŋowa ka nyobbe ki bal, ento ka bedo jo maleŋ. 	For God did not call us to be impure, but to live a holy life.
Wawinyo ni dano mogo ma gua ki botwa gubedo ka yelowu ki lok mapol, ki rubo tamwu woko, kadi bed wan pe wacikogi ki kit lok macalo meno. 	We have heard that some went out from us without our authorization and disturbed you, troubling your minds by what they said.
nyim tin wangi ottoo woko, gudongo ma jiri-jiri kenyo 	the simsim this season failed to grow, was all stunted
gwiny gweno beddo ni mit-mit ka konynye 	the fowl's anus contracts and relaxes when passing its droppings
giteddo layata ma dong oborro ni kwak 	the potatoes were cooked until they were very soft and splitting itself
tye ka luurro mada lawotte i tuko me rette 	he is battering thoroughly his competitor by throwing him down repeatedly
I dyeceŋ ki dyewor walego Lubaŋa matek twatwal pi nenowu waŋ ki waŋ, wek wamed botwu gin murem i kom niyewu. 	Night and day we pray most earnestly that we may see you again and supply what is lacking in your faith.
cul banynye woko wek icag ayella yella ma tye i kinwuni 	pay his debt so that it may heal the problems between you 
ngat mumito nyac pa lakware myero omadi	he who invites his grandson suffering from yaws must treat him
Kadi bed wa yer wiwu doŋ gikwanogi woko liweŋ. 	And even the very hairs of your head are all numbered.
cwinynye nwang 	he is doubtful not quite sure
Ka Yecu owaco ki gin ni, “An a en,” gujer ki ŋegi, gupoto piny. 	Now Judas, who betrayed him, knew the place, because Jesus had often met there with his disciples.
yeny adaa me lok man 	seek for the truth of this case
gin anenna man dok gibecco mada 	these flowers are very beautiful
ogwal maarro butto i wii abora twatwal	the frogs love to lie on the water lilies very much
dakone dok jwiyo jwic twatwal 	the woman is always hissing 
To ma en oto, oto pi bal, tyen acel keken, ento kwo ma en kwo kwede, kwo tuŋ bot Lubaŋa. 	Now if we died with Christ, we believe that we will also live with him.
leny baarro korre 	he is having heartburn
itto wii leela 	climbing the bicycle 
mwok dit callo opego ento en doki korre ogulle wiye bene bor pi dongge ma bor callo oceke cammo okok gwen ki gwen cingge tek mada me gollo bye 	an antbear is as big as a pig but its body is arched upwards and has a long head which is due to long tubular snout
“Dok ker me polo rom ki obwo ma giciko i nam ci omako kit kwa rec-gu ducu. 	“Once again, the kingdom of heaven is like a net that was let down into the lake and caught all kinds of fish.
latin ma umme luk ki otwinyo pe ber 	a child whose nose is clogged with mucus is not good
oleyo ni kwic layab ma gibolle 	he snatched straightaway the key thrown to him 
“Jerucalem, Jerucalem, in ma ineko lunebi, ma icelo jo ma gioro boti woko ki got, tyen adi ma nene amito coko litinoni woko macalo min gweno ma coko litinone i te bwome, ento wun pe wuye giwu! 	Truly I tell you, all this will come on this generation.
i kare macon dano ononggo gigerro odi ma olugge keken ento i kare man dong gigerro oddi matye ki twokke arjwen en aye ma gilwonggo ni jantoo nyo murukuba 	long time ago the people used to build round huts but now they build houses with four corners (rectangular) which they call jantoo or murukuba
Jon onoŋo mito kwero woko, owaco bot Yecu ni, “Amito in aye ibatija an, ento in dok ibino bota ni an aye abatija in?” 	Then Jesus came from Galilee to the Jordan to be baptized by John.
Dini me ada maleŋ, ma cilo pe iye i nyim Lubaŋa Wonwa en ene: konyo litino kic ki mon ma coggi oto i kom can ma gitye kwede, ki gwokke ken i kom bal me lobo.	Religion that God our Father accepts as pure and faultless is this: to look after orphans and widows in their distress and to keep oneself from being polluted by the world.
Ka gityeko pwodogi matek, ci gucwalogi i mabuc, kun giciko lalo mabuc ni ogwokgi maber. 	After they had been severely flogged, they were thrown into prison, and the jailer was commanded to guard them carefully.
citti ilwiny i tee pii wek okwee lyetto ma itye ka winynyone ni 	go and sink under the water so that it may cool the heat that you are feeling
yimme pa dano i bar odilo pe oyommo cwiny Jon 	the gathering of a large number of people in the football field did not please John 
ma peya ocammo 	before he has eaten
pii tye ka yenynyo 	the water is boiling
Caden meno en ene ni, Lubaŋa doŋ omiyowa kwo ma pe tum, dok kwo meno tye i Wode. 	And this is the testimony: God has given us eternal life, and this life is in his Son.
ci bologi woko i ruk mac, ka ma dano bibedo iye ka koko kun gikayo lakgi. 	They will throw them into the blazing furnace, where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.
I nino meno bene Lucadukayo gubino bot Yecu, gin aye jo ma onoŋo giwacci jo muto pe gicer. Ci gupenye ki peny mo acel, 	So they left him and went away.
Kodi dek karadali-ni dok tidi twatwal ki i kin kodi ducu, ento ka odoŋo doko yat madit makato dek ducu. Doko yat mo madit ma winyo me polo gibino gigero odigi i jaŋe.” 	Though it is the smallest of all seeds, yet when it grows, it is the largest of garden plants and becomes a tree, so that the birds come and perch in its branches.”
Pilato ouro ka doŋ otyeko to woko oyot kumeno	Pilate was surprised to hear that he was already dead
cakke kombeddi jo ma tye ki mon myero gubed calo jo ma pe ki mon, 	From now on those who have wives should live as if they do not;
Cwiny Maleŋ kacel ki nyako ger gitye ka wacci, “Bin!” Ŋat ma owinyo lok man bene myero ogam ni, “Bin!” Ŋat ma orwo neko myero obin, wek ŋat ma mito bene omat pii me kwo laboŋo wel. 	The Spirit and the bride say, “Come!” And let the one who hears say, “Come!” Let the one who is thirsty come; and let the one who wishes take the free gift of the water of life.
panggo odilo 	dodging the ball
Yecu ogamo doge ni, “Idok iye kakare	“You have answered correctly,” Jesus replied
dano adii mamitte me purro poto man? 	how many people are required to cultivate this field?
Ka oneno kit ma dano ma gilwoŋogi giyero ki kabedo mabeco, ci obolo botgi carolok ni, 	When he noticed how the guests picked the places of honor at the table, he told them this parable:
Ŋat mo ma bedo i en pe timo bal	No one who lives in him keeps on sinning
gucakko rommo ka Iweny pi gin mo matitkiimo mamwa 	they started to fight over a very small thing 
kwotto dano 	backbiting the people
ka ce cwinywa ŋolo kop loyowa, ci waŋeyo ni Lubaŋa dit kato cwinywa woko, dok ŋeyo lok ducu. 	If our hearts condemn us, we know that God is greater than our hearts, and he knows everything.
Ci Yecu olwoŋo latin mo bote, ocibo ocuŋ i kingi, 	He called a little child to him, and placed the child among them.
pe amitto nyig malakwangnyo kono potte keken 	I do not like seeds ot malakwang, except it's leaves
mupalici me nino man ducu dong me pwom keken pien yom mada 	most of the mattresses of these days are made of foam only because they are very soft
Yecu ocike matek, ka ocwale kwede ocito. 	Jesus sent him away at once with a strong warning:
Lupwonnye mukene gutitte ni, “Waneno Rwot.” Ento en odok iye ki gin ni, “Ka pe aneno poyo me cumar i ciŋe, ki keto nyig ciŋa i waŋ poyo me cumar, ki keto ciŋa i lakŋete, pe abiye kadi matidi mo.” 	Now Thomas (also known as Didymus), one of the Twelve, was not with the disciples when Jesus came.
waar man aye poore ki tyenne 	these are the shoes that fit him
kun wacci. “Nen ba, wan doŋ watye ka ito malo i yo Jerucalem. Wod pa dano doŋ gibimiye i ciŋ ajwagi madito pa Lubaŋa ki lupwony-cik, 	“We are going up to Jerusalem,” he said, “and the Son of Man will be delivered over to the chief priests and the teachers of the law
dongge yem yem 	the fringed and ravelled edge that floats
Cwinya yom i bino pa Citepana gin ki Portunato ki Akaiko, pien gin gucuŋ ma kakarwu. 	I was glad when Stephanas, Fortunatus and Achaicus arrived, because they have supplied what was lacking from you.
Pien ŋat ma owaco ni, “Pe itim abor,” owaco bene ni, “Pe ineki.” Ka inen ce pe itimo abor ento ineko dano, noŋo doŋ ituro cik. 	For he who said, “You shall not commit adultery,” also said, “You shall not murder.” If you do not commit adultery but do commit murder, you have become a lawbreaker.
Gubedo ka daŋŋe matek, ma giteŋo boŋŋigi, gidunyo apwa malo. 	As they were shouting and throwing off their cloaks and flinging dust into the air,
1bKa man otum, Yecu obedo ka wot i kin Galilaya	They shouted back, “No, not him! Give us Barabbas!” Now Barabbas had taken part in an uprising.
Okello tye ka junynyo otte i wii cere caa 	Okelo is bulding his small house on the hill there
Bibedo kumeno i nino meno ma Lubaŋa biŋolo kop i kom dano pi gin ma gitiyo i muŋ, ma miyo Yecu Kricito aye ŋolo, kun lubo lok me kwena maber ma atye ka titone-ni. 	(Indeed, when Gentiles, who do not have the law, do by nature things required by the law, they are a law for themselves, even though they do not have the law.
tim ber cwalla buk ma laworo aleggi pireni	please send me the book for which I asked yesterday
ked lakalakkii wek atwee hi yenna 	make a grass rope so that I may tie my firewood
owacco ni lok ma gilokko ni pe lok adaa 	he said that what was said was not true 
pii malyet en aye ber me lwok 	warm water is good for bathing
Yecu odok iye ni, “Kit ginapita ducu ma Wora ma tye i polo pe opito gibiputo woko ki lwite. 	Then the disciples came to him and asked, “Do you know that the Pharisees were offended when they heard this?”
Yecu ogamo doggi ni, “Wuket ot pa Lubaŋa man woko, an abigerone pi nino adek.” 	The Jews then responded to him, “What sign can you show us to prove your authority to do all this?”
Kit meno bene, Rakab, dako ma malaya, pe yam gikwane ni kite atir pi ticce, i kare ma yam en ojolo lukwena ka ocwalogi gucito woko i yo mukene? 	In the same way, was not even Rahab the prostitute considered righteous for what she did when she gave lodging to the spies and sent them off in a different direction?
Ento ka ilwoŋŋe keni ni in Lajudaya kono? Noŋo i jeŋŋe i kom cik, kun iwakke bene pi Lubaŋa, 	This will take place on the day when God judges people’s secrets through Jesus Christ, as my gospel declares.
bongo pa Latin 	mitto alwokka, the child's clothes need washing
giwotto atenna nyo gibeddo atenna 	they walk or live together in great intimacy
icitto ka timmo ngoo i taun? 	what are you going to do in the town?
latinne ming mada beddo ka tullo dudde ki luwadi gi 	the child is very stupid, she does projects her buttocks backwards to her companions from time to time 
Wudonyo doŋ i kit lweny ma yam wuneno i koma-ni, dok bene kombeddi pud wuwinyo ni atye iye.	For it has been granted to you on behalf of Christ not only to believe in him, but also to suffer for him,
Luparicayo ki lupwony-cik guŋur kun giwaco ni, “Dano man jolo lubalo dok camo kwedgi.” 	But the Pharisees and the teachers of the law muttered, “This man welcomes sinners and eats with them.”
Wakwaŋ wao i Cirakuca, wadikke kunnu nino adek. 	We put in at Syracuse and stayed there three days.
oyo pii i poto gin anena	watering the flower garden 
wugwokke mada me katto ki lok ma jalle nino ducu mukke ki lok mogo ma noggo pe adaa 	be careful to spread words that fellow saki because sometimes he comes with fantastic story which is not true
gwok onyatto cet kany mada 	the dog has passed many of its droppings here 
puc me kom ot man pe ber 	the plastering of this house is not good 
latinne pe ononggo cak maber maromme ma ononggo pud tidi, pien minne obeddo katwoo twatwal omiyo obeddo odeba 	the child did not get enough milk while she was young because her mother was ill most of the time, that is why she is stunted and malnourished
pe ibed ka ballo kare tam gin ma imitto oyot oyot 	don't waste time, think quickly what about you want 
bollo obwoo me lee nyo me rec 	spreading a net for catching animal or fish,
Ci omako min kulu madit ca, ma obedo twol macon-ni, ma en aye Ladot dok Catan bene, ka otweye woko pi mwaka alip acel, 	He seized the dragon, that ancient serpent, who is the devil, or Satan, and bound him for a thousand years.
ento bedo me kwer bot ŋat ma tamo ni obedo me kwer. 	I am convinced, being fully persuaded in the Lord Jesus, that nothing is unclean in itself
laditti lamme rac pien nino ducu ka olammo ngati marac ci gin mo timme i kom ngat meno 	the cursing of that old man is bad because when he has cursed someone, something happens on the person
matto keno ki cam madowong miyo dano mette mada 	drinking and eating too much food makes people to become very fat 
Wuti ticwu ki cwiny maber, macalo wutiyo bot Rwot, ento pe wutiyo bot dano ni gunen wek gupwowu, 	Obey them not only to win their favor when their eye is on you, but as slaves of Christ, doing the will of God from your heart.
kom ot twerro pamme maber mada 	the wall of this house can be well plastered 
Paulo odonyo iye macalo kite tye, ori kunnu pi cabit adek kun obedo ka laro lok kwedgi i kom lok ma i ginacoya. 	As was his custom, Paul went into the synagogue, and on three Sabbath days he reasoned with them from the Scriptures,
nyoggo ber ki coo ento pe ki mon 	squatting is good for men but not for women
remmo ki cam 	a miser does not like visitors because he fears that they come to share part of the food so it becomes not enough for him
iye ka nyoyo komme woko pien pe mitto medde ki kwan 	is giving up because he does not want to continue with studies
Atito botwu ni, kadi bed en pe bia malo ka miye gin mo pi bedo lareme, ento pi dide ci bia, bimiye gin ducu ma en mito. 	I tell you, even though he will not get up and give you the bread because of friendship, yet because of your shameless audacity he will surely get up and give you as much as you need.
geg litino pe gubed ka tukko i ot 	prevent the children from playing in the house
Ocan en aye ladit madit ma loyo luteddo mukene ducu 	Ocan is the head cook 
Dano ma pe tamme oballe i koma tye ki gum.” 	Blessed is anyone who does not stumble on account of me.”
Pien macalo Won cero jo muto, miyogi kwo, kit meno Wod bene miyo kwo bot jo ma en mito. 	Yes, and he will show him even greater works than these, so that you will be amazed.
poorro kit yoo ma ngati mo timmo kwede	to imitate the way how one does it
Yecu oille, openyo dako ni, “Dako, gin kono gitye kwene? Pe tye ŋat mo ma oŋolo kop loyi?” 	Again he stooped down and wrote on the ground.
Ka woo meno owinnye, lwak ducu gucokke kun wigi ocuŋ woko, pien onoŋo ŋat acel acel winyogi ka giloko leb tugi kikome. 	When they heard this sound, a crowd came together in bewilderment, because each one heard their own language being spoken.
ento wan giwa watito pi Kricito ma yam giguro i kom yatariya, ma lokke ki tuŋ bot Lujudaya obedo lok atata, ki bot Lurok nen lok me miŋo. 	but we preach Christ crucified: a stumbling block to Jews and foolishness to Gentiles,
ngat ma twerro beddo lapok kin joo aryo ma gitye ka daani en aye Onek 	the one who can separate the two quarrelling persons is Onek
wii meja gijwayo mapwot mada 	the top of the table has been highly polished and very smooth 
pim bongo pa latin man wek i kwoo	spoiling by over indulging a child or the wife
i kare mogo kolo kido i komme inn mitto ni myerro elweny 	sometimes he is seized with anger which makes him want to fight
waa dongi ki lemun man 	stimulate your taste and appetite with this lemon
Orwone dok gua ki i Betania, ma kun kec neke. 	The next day as they were leaving Bethany, Jesus was hungry.
citto ka wot me rweene ki me limmo yamo mamit	to take a walk for stretching the legs and getting fresh air
Yecu olwoŋogi bote, oloko kwedgi i carolok ni, “Catan twero ryemo Catan niŋniŋ? 	So Jesus called them over to him and began to speak to them in parables: “How can Satan drive out Satan?
rocco tee kwoor macon 	reopening the old enmity or reviving an old enmity
opotto oturro bade woko ononggo tye ka lyerre 	he fell and broke his arm when he was swinging
ryanyo kwon  	making a big amount of kwon
an ŋat ma kwo-ni. Yam onoŋo ato woko, ento koŋ inen, kombeddi atye kwo, abibedo kwo matwal. Dok bene layab me To ki me Lyel tye bota. 	I am the Living One; I was dead, and now look, I am alive for ever and ever! And I hold the keys of death and Hades.
lateddo tim me dwar 	one who makes successful and peaceful hunting
pido banya i kot 	suing for payment of the debt before the court
puno en aye lee ma wotto ki tyenne aryo callo dano, ento ka mitto wotto callo lee mukene ma giwotto ki tyengi agwen, ci nyonno gem ki gee cingge ma omiyo calo gunya 	gorilla is an animal which walks upright on two legs like human being, but when it wants to walk like other animals which walk on four legs, he walks on the backs of the closed fingers like chimpanzees 
En pe oketo nipoko i kinwa ki gin, ento olonyo cwinygi pi niye. 	He did not discriminate between us and them, for he purified their hearts by faith.
Man gin ma en ociko me miyowa, en aye kwo ma pe tum. 	And this is what he promised us—eternal life.
yoo ocitto ni pok 	the road has gone on very wide and broad 
lyerro awal i kor ot 	to suspend the calabash on the wall
jalle opuny tyenne dok gidonggo mada callo dano ma yang obeddo put 	the fellow has very big heels like somebody who suffered from malnutrition 
Wan kikomwa wan Lujudaya nia wa i anywalli, pe wan Lurok, jo ma lubalo-gu. 	The other Jews joined him in his hypocrisy, so that by their hypocrisy even Barnabas was led astray.
waddo wang pii tye diki	to remove of the mud from the water well is tomorrow 
gek wotto i dan ot mape potto piny 	gecko crawls under the ceiling without falling down
miyo wubiŋeyo lok me ada, lok me ada bigonyowu.” 	Even as he spoke, many believed in him.
tye ka pyem ni en pe labal 	he is protesting his innocence 
pal latinne pien tye ka dangge twatwal	slap the child because he is shouting too much
tye rangi ma pat pat macallo magi 	there are many varieties of colours like these 
Pien jo ma nino, ginino dyewor, jo ma mer ki koŋo gimer bene dyewor, 	For those who sleep, sleep at night, and those who get drunk, get drunk at night.
“Gitye ki gum jo ma mwol, pien gibileyo lobo doko megi. 	Blessed are the meek, for they will inherit the earth.
kwakala ma gicikko me makko oyoo otuk woko ma onongo oyoo pud pekke 	the trap set did not catch the rat, because it came off before the rat was there
niye keken aye konyo, ma ticce aye mar. 	For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision nor uncircumcision has any value
opego bukke ki daba 	pigs take mud bathing by swimming in muddy water 
Odure kati woko wen keno-wen keno wanggo cunni 	Odure, come out from near the fireplace, the fireplace will burn your penis, in other words, Odure should not be with his mother when she is cooking
Jo mukene guwaco ni, “Man gire Kricito ma Lubaŋa oyero.” Jo mukene dok gipenyo apenya ni, “Kricito ma Lubaŋa oyero yam a i Galilaya? 	On hearing his words, some of the people said, “Surely this man is the Prophet.”
Cwinye obedo yom me nyutta Wode, wek acit atit pire bot Lurok. I kare ma lok man otimme, pe aa acito bot dano mo ni omiya tam, 	But when God, who set me apart from my mother’s womb and called me by his grace, was pleased
dot en aye pire tek mada ki litino wek gubed laboggo two ka pud gitino 	suckling is very important for the children so that they may be very healthy while they are still very young 
gunyotto wii twol woko ki odoo 	they smashed the snakes head to a pulp with a stick
man dano me adek ma dong gubinno	this is the third person who has come
buc gweno man me atedda 	pluck this chicken for cooking
yom cwiny   	happiness, gladness, pleasure, contentment
Ka gigonyogi ci gucito bot luremgi ka gutito botgi gin ma ajwagi madito pa Lubaŋa ki ludoŋo guwaco botgi. 	On their release, Peter and John went back to their own people and reported all that the chief priests and the elders had said to them.
lacoo ma la cwi cwii 	a man who is a tormenter and always nagging
latin tye ka lyerre 	the child is swinging 
En ogamo ni, “Aniaŋ niŋniŋ kono, ka ŋat mo pe okonya?” Ci olwoŋo Pilipo ni obed kwede kacel. 	“How can I,” he said, “unless someone explains it to me?” So he invited Philip to come up and sit with him.
tye ka itto yen madowong mada i odd 	she is stacking a large amount of firewood in her house
Ka lupwonnyene gupenye te lok me carolok man, 	His disciples asked him what this parable meant.
tong ogwal gabbe wii pii 	frogs' spawns float on the surface of the water
Doŋ wutamo ni can ma rom mene ma gibiketo i kom ŋat ma ocayo Wod pa Lubaŋa, dok ma opyedo remo me gicikke pa Lubaŋa ma gilonye kwede me bedo maleŋ, dok ma oŋalo Cwiny Maleŋ me kica pa Lubaŋa? 	How much more severely do you think someone deserves to be punished who has trampled the Son of God underfoot, who has treated as an unholy thing the blood of the covenant that sanctified them, and who has insulted the Spirit of grace?
odilo motto oyot oyot ka lawang golo aa woko ki i wang golo citto anyim 	the ball enters the goal easily if the goalkeeper leaves the goal and goes out forward
remmo kidi madit i yoo me gengo dano wok kenyo 	to roll a big stone on the road to prevent people passing along the road  
I kare ma onoŋo pud wubedo opii me bal, onoŋo pe wubedo i te loc me kit ma atir. 	You have been set free from sin and have become slaves to righteousness.
pien ŋat mutiyo kacel ki Petero tic me tito lok me kwena maber bot Lujudaya, obedo ka tic i koma bene bot Lurok. 	As for those who were held in high esteem—whatever they were makes no difference to me; God does not show favoritism—they added nothing to my message.
latinne tye ka tirri woko pe dongo 	the child is becoming stunt, cannot grow
jalle laguna mada, pe twerro tito lok mo ma atir 	the fellow is a liar he cannot tell you straight forward words
latin gwinynyo gwinynye twatwal myero obed ki olwinyo 	this child scratches too much his anus, he must have thread worms 
En yam oloko lok man i kom Cwiny Maleŋ, ma jo ma giye en bilimo	Whoever believes in me, as Scripture has said, rivers of living water will flow from within them.”
dako pa Oketa dok cek twatwal ka iporro ki en 	Oketa's wife is too short compared to him
wallo bongo woke ki i komme 	taking off part of the clothes from his her body
coyo wang alit gin marac mada  	to revive  the old enmity is very bad 
pwon omiyo dano pe dong gimaarro coyo waraga pien dong gilokko ki ngat ma imitto alokka 	a phone has made people hate to write letters because you can speak straightaway to the one you want 
rwot Atiak tye kwene 	where is Atiak's chief? 
jalle lamerro mada 	the fellow is always very drunk
Ka Kricito yam pe gicero, ci kwena ma watito-ni doŋ yone pe, kadi wa niyewu bene yone pe. 	And if Christ has not been raised, our preaching is useless and so is your faith.
Ka kare doŋ oromo me lonnyegi macalo cik pa Moses tye, ci gutere i Jerucalem wek gityere bot Rwot, 	When the time came for the purification rites required by the Law of Moses, Joseph and Mary took him to Jerusalem to present him to the Lord
Ka Yecu oniaŋ ni gimito bino ka make tetek pi kete me bedo kabaka, ci olwi, ocito i wi got kene. 	After the people saw the sign Jesus performed, they began to say, “Surely this is the Prophet who is to come into the world.”
in mono itye katimo ngoo? 	what are you doing now? 
pe rac, en dong otimmo macallo kit meno 	it does not matter, he did it like that 
rok i yat man 	hollow out this wood
moko me teddo mugati	flour for making bread
pien doŋ wadoko ginanena pi jo ma i wi lobo ducu, bot lumalaika ki bot dano. 	We have been made a spectacle to the whole universe, to angels as well as to human beings.
nen malo caa 	look up there
Jami ducu tye pi Lubaŋa, dok en aye muketogi. Doŋ ka yam en omito kelo litino mapol i deyone, gin ma en otimo obedo ma myero twatwal, en mumiyo latel wigi i larre doko dano muteggi pi ciro can. 	In bringing many sons and daughters to glory, it was fitting that God, for whom and through whom everything exists, should make the pioneer of their salvation perfect through what he suffered.
Lurema, kombeddi doŋ wan litino pa Lubaŋa	Dear friends, now we are children of God, and what we will be has not yet been made known
layatane twerro tunynye 	the potatoes can be uprooted
gimakko luyak ka yakko bege 	the robbers were arrested while robbing the bank 
lunebi mapol gutittoni gibinywallo lalar 	many prophets predicted that a saviour would be born
Pien wan ducu, Lujudaya ki jo Grik, opii ki jo ma gilone kengi, gibatijawa wadoko kom acel i Cwiny acel-lu pa Lubaŋa, wan ducu wamato en Cwiny acel-lu. 	For we were all baptized by one Spirit so as to form one body—whether Jews or Gentiles, slave or free—and we were all given the one Spirit to drink.
Koŋ wuwek doo ki kal ducu gudoŋ kacel nio wa i kare me kac	Let both grow together until the harvest
lwak dano gubinno gurummo abili woko 	a crowd of people came and surrounded the policemen
pe icit imwam lok paco kuno pi gin ma otimme kany, pien in lamwam lok 	do not go and blurt out the secret of what has happened here, because you are a person who does not keep secrets
I dyewor i cawa meno kikome oterogi olwoko waŋ retgi, ci gibatija en cut ki jo me ode ducu. 	At that hour of the night the jailer took them and washed their wounds; then immediately he and all his household were baptized.
I kare mukato onoŋo wubedo jo muto pi turo cik ki balwu. 	However, each one of you also must love his wife as he loves himself, and the wife must respect her husband.
jwaano coc ki i korn bao, jwaano bao wek obed mapwot, jwaano lak 	wiping i rubbing off the writing, polishing the board to be very smooth, brushing the teeth
litino tin gucammo oceyo mada, nen Iwak pokgi ma oket ata kany 	the children today ate oceyo very much, look at their broken shells which are scattered all over here 
kella lagwar yugi 	the children went to uproot and collect the laguti mushrooms from the field
Wan mono watye ka bolo cik pa Moses woko pi man? Pe kumeno wacel, wan giwa wamoko cik amoka.	since there is only one God, who will justify the circumcised by faith and the uncircumcised through that same faith.
Pe awaco man ni wek kop olowu, pien yam awaco botwu koŋ ni wun piwu lit botwa mada, wek wato dok wakwo kacel kwedwu. 	We have wronged no one, we have corrupted no one, we have exploited no one.
en lokko twatwal, aa male igon ka wek oling 	he talks too much, get up and tell him off to silence him
dyegi gitye ka Iwobbe alwobba 	the goats are following one another 
gin me aurra 	is the proper sentence for the above
Pi meno doŋ wuciti wucilok jo me rok ducu gudok jo ma luba, kun wubatijagi i nyiŋ Won ki Wod ki Cwiny Maleŋ, 	Then Jesus came to them and said, “All authority in heaven and on earth has been given to me.
ka laden olot mabor okatto woko ci gilwougo ni lyeer 	when the inner lip of the vagina has grown and comes out it is called lyeer
pen litino lukere ma gitweyo terro nino abic kadong potto 	it takes five days for the stump of the neonate's umbilicus which was tied to fall off
twoo marac ma tokko kom woko 	a very bad disease which ulcerate, the body, that is, it causes sores or ulcers all over the body
Waŋeyo ni i gin ducu Lubaŋa tiyo pi kelo gin maber ki jo ducu ma gimare jo ma en olwoŋogi kit macalo en oyubo. 	And he who searches our hearts knows the mind of the Spirit, because the Spirit intercedes for God’s people in accordance with the will of God.
wucit oyot oyot ka laggo litino ki cam kec nekkongi 	go quickly with food to save the children from hunger 
Ka ma an acito iye, wun wuŋeyo yone.” 	And if I go and prepare a place for you, I will come back and take you to be with me that you also may be where I am.
Ento dano-nu pi mito loyo kop, openyo Yecu ni, “Lawota aŋa?” 	But he wanted to justify himself, so he asked Jesus, “And who is my neighbor?”
gangge dok tye oyutte yutte ki Kampala 	his home is some distance from Kampala
wamitto joo ma tye ki gubo me ywayo motoka ma opotto i burri 	we want strong and powerful people to come to pull out the car which has fallen down into a pit
Gin ma acikowu en ene ni, wumarre kekenwu. 	Instead, I have called you friends, for everything that I learned from my Father I have made known to you.
Gudokke iye ni, “Wan likwayo pa Abraim	Then you will know the truth, and the truth will set you free.”
twenynyo bol tong 	straightening the shaft of the spear
pwon (cim) ma itinggo i cinggi gin me tanggo mada pien miyo ilokko ki dano kama bor calo tye ka ngetti kany 	the mobile phone which is carried in the hand is a miracle thing because it makes you speak to a man far away as if he is near you
“Dano man loko kuman piŋo? En oyeto Lubaŋa! Aŋa ma twero weko bal kono ŋat acel keken, en aye Lubaŋa?” 	“Why does this fellow talk like that? He’s blaspheming! Who can forgive sins but God alone?”
Wel askari me mony ma onoŋo giŋweco ki aguragura onoŋo romo milion miya aryo	The number of the mounted troops was twice ten thousand times ten thousand
Kica, kuc ki mar myero omedde botwu. 	Jude, a servant of Jesus Christ and a brother of James, To those who have been called, who are loved in God the Father and kept for Jesus Christ:
wangge lik 	looks serious and frightening
Nyo mugati abiro pi jo alip aŋwen, yam wucoko ŋide opoŋo adita adi? 	Or the seven loaves for the four thousand, and how many basketfuls you gathered?
pe wutit lok marac ma bigakko litino 	do not preach bad words that will mislead the children
Yecu openyo wonne ni, “Two man obedo ka timme kit man pi lwak kare ma rom mene?” Wonne ogamo ni, “Nia wa ka tinone. 	Jesus asked the boy’s father, “How long has he been like this?” “From childhood,” he answered.
Laco yam pe giketo nia ki i kom dako, ento dako aye oa i kom laco. 	For man did not come from woman, but woman from man;
Nyeko omaka piwu ki lakodi nyeko ma Lubaŋa tye kwede bene-ni	On the contrary, in Christ we speak before God with sincerity, as those sent from God.
Ento Yecu owaco ni, “Gin man pe twerre ki bot dano, ento ki bot Lubaŋa twerre.” 	Jesus replied, “What is impossible with man is possible with God.”
wek abwot woko ki bot jo ma pe guye Kricito ma gitye i Judaya, dok bene wek omi jo pa Lubaŋa ma gitye i Jerucalem gupwo tic ma acito ka tiyone kunnu. 	I urge you, brothers and sisters, by our Lord Jesus Christ and by the love of the Spirit, to join me in my struggle by praying to God for me.
acom i komme i dye Kampala laworo 	I met him unexpectedly yesterday in Kampala 
ka gunene, ci gubako doggi bote ni en myero oa woko ki i lobogi.	Then the whole town went out to meet Jesus
man tim me coor mada, in latin matkiimo mamwa ma pud ginywalli lawor man en, ci dong immitti pwonywa, gin angoo ma ingeyo ma itwerro pwonynyowa kwedde? cit cen kwica 	this is a daring act, you a child who was born yesterday, now you want to teach us what do you know that you can teach us? Get out and go away! 
Mar diyo cwinye i kom jami ducu, ye lok ducu,, dok bedo ki gen i kare ducu, keto tek bene me ciro jami ducu. 	It always protects, always trusts, always hopes, always perseveres.
gin ni ducu gujemmo, makgi 	all these have struck, apprehend them
wotto ni jam jam 	walks treading on the ground with his feet
wun pe wumitto ni awac gin mo? 	don't you want me to say anything? 
wek latin olyak tyenne ki bacilin	let the child smear vaseline on his legs
en aye ŋat ma bino ki i ŋeya, ma an pe amyero ka gonyo del warre.” 	questioned him, “Why then do you baptize if you are not the Messiah, nor Elijah, nor the Prophet?”
dano myero gungee Iwiny i tee pii 	people must know how to sink under water 
tim oyot oyot 	do it quickly 
Myero wati tic pa ŋat ma oora ma ceŋ pud tye	“Neither this man nor his parents sinned,” said Jesus, “but this happened so that the works of God might be displayed in him.
pien jo ma ginywalo i kin jo Icrael pe gin ducu jo Icrael, 	It is not as though God’s word had failed
anyira tuur ka dong gurommo mwaka apar wiye abic 	the girls reach puberty when they are fifteen years old
onyubbo warre ki daba 	he soiled his shoes with mud
gen Yecu ci bilarri 	trust Jesus and He will save you
wawotto i ajata ma pe wacce i kare ma wacitto ka giwarro anyeri	we walked for a long time in the muddy places when we went to hunt the large edible rats
Ento lamalaika owacca ni, “Piŋo iuro? Abititti lok me muŋ pa dako-nu, ki pa lee ma dako obedo i wiye, ma wiye tye abiro ki tuŋe tye apar-ri. 	Then the angel said to me: “Why are you astonished? I will explain to you the mystery of the woman and of the beast she rides, which has the seven heads and ten horns.
Ka cawa oromo abicel, piny ocido woko macol i lobo ducu, nio kwede wa i cawa aboŋwen. 	At noon, darkness came over the whole land until three in the afternoon.
Ci Moses oriŋo woko pi lok meno, ka ocito odoko labedo i lobo Midian, onywalo iye litino awobe aryo. 	When Moses heard this, he fled to Midian, where he settled as a foreigner and had two sons.
Paulo oneno gin mo i waŋ lek dyewor, laco mo me Makedonia noŋo ocuŋ i nyime, obako doge bote kun waco ni, “Kwaŋ nam ibin i Makedonia ikonywa.” 	During the night Paul had a vision of a man of Macedonia standing and begging him, “Come over to Macedonia and help us.”
tuc it pa min it tyen mapol as pi twoo anyoo ki aburo nyo aona marac twatwal 	perforation of the eardrum usually is caused by measles, severe cold in the head, and severe chronic cough 
Lacen Yecu ocako loko lok ki kiniga i kom gaŋi mogo ka ma onoŋo en otiyo iye ticce matego madito, pien jo ma tye iye gukwero ŋut woko. 	Then Jesus began to denounce the towns in which most of his miracles had been performed, because they did not repent.
Tim magi maraco-ni ducu gia ki i cwiny dano, gin aye gibalo dano.” 	All these evils come from inside and defile a person.”
ot otudde ki yito 	the house was filled with smoke
Doŋ kit macalo onoŋo ibedo mormor, pe ibedo ŋic dok bene pe ibedo lyet, abiŋuli woko ki i doga. 	So, because you are lukewarm—neither hot nor cold—I am about to spit you out of my mouth.
Ka en okelogi woko ci owaccigi ni, “Luditona, myero atim aŋo wek alarre?” 	He then brought them out and asked, “Sirs, what must I do to be saved?”
lakwoo libbe mot mot ka citto ka kwal 	a thief walks stealthily when going to steal
in dano marac 	you are a bad person 
jalle ogwal bade donggo mada pien en tiyo tic matek me tonggo gweg ka gitye ka kwinynyo jabu 	the fellow's arm muscles are very big because he does the hard work of breaking stones when they are digging for gold
otwol kot beddo i kweyo, tekki kot ocweer ci otwol kot katti kama leng 	an earthworm lives in the sand earth, when it rains, it comes out 
i kom luditto odig nen i kom joo matye ki pekko me remo 	in the adult nose bleeding is seen in people with blood pressure
dano adii mamitte me purro poto man? 	how many people are required to cultivate this field?
Ka doŋ onyiko cok, ma oneno gaŋ, okok pire, 	As he approached Jerusalem and saw the city, he wept over it
Ka ŋat mo obino otittigi ni, “Jo ma wuketogi i ot kol-li, gitye gucuŋ i ot pa Lubaŋa ka pwonyo dano.” 	Then someone came and said, “Look! The men you put in jail are standing in the temple courts teaching the people.”
obwollo Nyeko nono me mine cente 	he deceived Nyeko for nothing that he would give him money 
Yam atimo kit meno i Jerucalem	And that is just what I did in Jerusalem
ngad yer wic latin man 	cut the hair of this child 
Dok bene ka ce ŋat mo okwanyo lok mo woko ki i kom lok ma gitito i buk kany, Lubaŋa bene bikwanyo twerone me camo yat me kwo ki donyo i gaŋ maleŋ woko, ma gicoyo pigi i buk kany-nyi. 	And if anyone takes words away from this scroll of prophecy, God will take away from that person any share in the tree of life and in the Holy City, which are described in this scroll.
logo twerro medde madit ma rommo kadi latili miya acel, en mere pe rem dok pe lit nyo kono pekke keken 	hydrocele can become big up to one hundred pounds, it is not painful and does not produce pain except its weight only
dano gitye ka jogge mada i tee kanica 	people are collecting themselves very much at the church
Omako mel, opaŋo wiye ma pe doŋ twero kemo yamo, ci waweko mel doŋ woto ka ma yamo oterowa. 	The ship was caught by the storm and could not head into the wind; so we gave way to it and were driven along.
kot tye ka gitto 	the rain is drizzling 
Orwone Paulo ocito kwedwa bot Yakobo ma onoŋo ludoŋo ducu gitye. 	The next day Paul and the rest of us went to see James, and all the elders were present.
wacitto Kampala ki bac 	we went to Kampala by bus
Pe ibwot mot me cwiny ma itye kwede-ni oballe nono, ma yam gimii pi lok ma lutit lok pa Lubaŋa gutito i kare ma ludoŋo giketo ciŋgi i wii. 	Until I come, devote yourself to the public reading of Scripture, to preaching and to teaching.
ayom mudong een nyero ib lawote	the monkey laughs at the long tail of one infront of it
two jonynyo	wasting disease (AIDS) 
Ento jo mukene gunyerogi anyera kun giwaco ni, “Jo-ni gumer ki koŋo vino manyen.” 	Some, however, made fun of them and said, “They have had too much wine.”
Kica ki kuc myero onya botwu pi ŋeyo Lubaŋa ki Rwotwa Yecu Kricito. 	Grace and peace be yours in abundance through the knowledge of God and of Jesus our Lord.
Gin ma mitte ki bot lugwok jami, en aye ni myero gubed jo ma genne. 	Now it is required that those who have been given a trust must prove faithful.
Aŋeyo itye ka diyo cwinyi, kun iciro can pi nyiŋa, dok bene pud pe iol giri. 	You have persevered and have endured hardships for my name, and have not grown weary.
oloto me goyo bul 	the stick for beating the drum
Kodi jo-nu myero gimi guliŋ woko, pien gitye ka balo dano mapol ki jo ma i odigi ducu, pi pwonyogi ki gin ma pe oporre ma pe myero gupwony ki dano, pi woro me noŋo lim. 	For there are many rebellious people, full of meaningless talk and deception, especially those of the circumcision group.
en barre woko ki i kom luwotte ci citto mere kamukene 	he turns away suddenly from his companions and goes to another place
dano ma twerro poo oyot oyot inenno ki kit lokke ki timme ne 	a man who can go quickly mad is seen by the way of his talk and behaviour
Wun litino ororo, wutwero loko lok maber niŋniŋ, ma kun wun jo maraco? Pien lok ma ogurre i cwiny dano, en aye dog bene loko. 	And so I tell you, every kind of sin and slander can be forgiven, but blasphemy against the Spirit will not be forgiven.
latinna boddo wiya, miyo pe abeddo kena 	my child keeps me busy and prevents me from being lonely
Pien mugati tye acel, wan ma wapol-li bene wabedo kom acel, pien wan ducu wanywako camo en mugati acel-lu. 	Because there is one loaf, we, who are many, are one body, for we all share the one loaf.
Dano ca odok iye ni, “Man lok me aura twatwal! Wun pe wuŋeyo ka ma en oa iye, kun en oyabo waŋa. 	We know that God spoke to Moses, but as for this fellow, we don’t even know where he comes from.”
nget iye	annoy and provoke him 
litino gitye ka tukko pyee malo ki pyee piny mabor 	the children are in high jump and long jump games
dakone dong wotto mere lataya 	the woman now roams all over, that is, she is a prostitute
Pien Lubaŋa pe oyerowa ni kinigane opot i komwa, ento ni walarre pi Rwotwa Yecu Kricito, 	For God did not appoint us to suffer wrath but to receive salvation through our Lord Jesus Christ.
leggo Lubanga 	to pray praying to God 
Lucat-wil me lobo bene gitye ka koko kun gikumo pire, pien ŋat mo pe ma dok biwilo jami ma opoŋ i melgi, 	“The merchants of the earth will weep and mourn over her because no one buys their cargoes anymore—
Cutcut lamalaika pa Rwot oturo ki bino, ocuŋ i kingi, deyo pa Rwot oryeny orumogi, ci lworo omakogi matek. 	An angel of the Lord appeared to them, and the glory of the Lord shone around them, and they were terrified.
biny yer wii latin man maber 	twist the hair on this child's head into nice curls
Lupwonnye cwinygi obedo yom dok gupoŋ ki Cwiny Maleŋ.	And the disciples were filled with joy and with the Holy Spirit.
Ka doŋ pe oye, ci waweko kun wawaco ni, “Gin ma Rwot mito myero otimme.” 	When he would not be dissuaded, we gave up and said, “The Lord’s will be done.”
ka kono nene wuwinyo lok i kome ada, dok gipwonyowu, wun jo ma lubo en, ki lok ada ma tye i Yecu.	That, however, is not the way of life you learned
nyono mum ni puny pany ki tyenne 	walking making his big marks with his feet
Macalo lwak muye Kricito gibedo i te locce, kit meno mon bene myero gubed i te loc pa coggi i kit yo ducu. 	Wives, submit yourselves to your own husbands as you do to the Lord.
pit tek mada 	upbringing is very difficult
kwar piny 	morning glow 
jok kare mukene kido I komme 	sometimes he gets possess by the demons that is why he shakes with a tremour ot body and limbs 
ngat ma lamaar Iweny twatwal myerro beddo tegge i kilac 	one who loves to fight very much should be put to sit away by himself in the class
